Proposed reforms to the Champions League would have a “devastating” effect on English football according to the Crystal Palace chairman, Steve Parish, as clubs from around Europe speak up against the plans. With a decision expected imminently on the new structure of the competition – which would include 100 extra matches and four new “exclusive game weeks” running from Tuesday to Thursday – Parish said that the reforms would probably mean the end of the League Cup in England. “In the middle of a pandemic these decisions are made that may fundamentally change the view of football in domestic leagues forever,” he said. “From the point of view where we sit, this will have quite a devastating effect on domestic competition in England. “We have three competitions, one of which – the League Cup – is one of the largest financial contributors to the Football League and its 72 clubs. This proposal will probably see the end of that cup in its entirety, or reduced to some kind of youth competition. Where does this all end?” Parish was speaking at an emergency meeting of the European Leagues organisation and called on clubs from across the continent to find common ground. “This may not be affecting your domestic league maybe as much as it looks like it will affect our domestic competitions, but the creep is never-ending,” he added. “With the assault on the calendar, we are talking about a transfer of value from domestic leagues to European competition. I think it’s very concerning.” Parish was supported in his remarks by the chair of the Football League, Rick Parry, who said his organisation could lose a third of its revenues if the League Cup was scrapped. “The calendar clearly poses a major threat to the future of the League Cup and in turn this will have a massive effect on the EFL’s revenues,” Parry said. “We estimate that we could lose up to a third of the revenues that we distribute. That would pose a very real threat to the existence of some of our clubs.” Clubs from Sweden, Turkey, Germany and the Netherlands, among others, spoke up against what is known by Uefa as Horizon 24, but there remains only a small window for possible change. Uefa has postponed a meeting at which new plans were expected to be voted through, but this week the president of the European Clubs Association, Andrea Agnelli, who represents the interests of football’s biggest clubs, said he expected a decision within two weeks. The European Leagues president, Lars-Christer Olsson, said the proposed expansion of the calendar would break a memorandum of understanding that his organisation has with Uefa, and proposes a smaller increase in matches of eight in the group stages rather than the currently suggested 10. His organisation is hopeful that changes on access to the Champions League, which would mean some teams qualifying regardless of their league position, could yet be amended. Olsson called on leagues to persuade their national associations to lobby Uefa for change.