In the end, England’s frazzled minds and tortured techniques were unable to resist as India completed a comprehensive innings victory inside three days that wrapped up a 3-1 series win and a place in the final of the World Test Championship. Virat Kohli’s men will meet New Zealand in England in June and though conditions will be vastly different to those witnessed over the past month – and a heavy diet of white-ball cricket fills the gap – the force should very much be with them, not least when considering their historic series victory in Australia either side of Christmas. For England there is much to ponder. Eoin Morgan’s hell-raising white-ball team are in town and will be at full strength for the five-match Twenty20 series up next. But while this offers a source of hope the tour may end on a brighter note, it also leaves a sense of what might have been had the Test side been the one to take priority. Granted this is oversimplifying a situation made hugely complex by the pandemic and overstating the difference that Jos Buttler, Moeen Ali, and Jonny Bairstow might have made had they been available for the whole series. After all, this impressive India side are a rampant winning machine in their own backyard. But the England brains trust views the Ashes tour at the end of a congested year as a project similar to the 2019 World Cup. With a T20 World Cup in October, and the Indian Premier League non-negotiable in this era of player power, a marquee Test tour somehow became the window for periods of rest. The upshot of this and some selectorial overthinking has been three helpings of one-way traffic. Though their initial victory in Chennai was handsome – and the ledger from their subcontinental winter reads three wins, three defeats – English confidence drained away once the pitches became fruitier, despite winning three of the four tosses. The fourth and final instalment merely continued the trend, albeit on a surface far more benign than the previous two. India bowled England out for 135 after tea on the third day for victory by an innings and 25 runs, as the devilishly accurate spin duo of Axar Patel and Ravichandran Ashwin claimed all 10 for a pair of fine five-wicket hauls. For Patel it was a fourth in three appearances – had Ravindra Jadeja been fit, the left-armer might still be awaiting his debut – while Ashwin took his tally to 30 in 78 Tests, with 32 victims making this his most profitable series. Add in a century in the second Test and it has been some campaign from the 34-year-old. From an English perspective only a neat 50 from Dan Lawrence could offer balm to the wounds of another wince-inducing collapse and, though he was the last man out, bowled by Ashwin trying to force a punch off the back foot, his return to the side delivered 97 runs overall and staked his claim for the home summer. Lawrence’s recall at No 7 meant a diluted bowling attack, however, and one that rather ran out of gas on the second day when, in reply to a sub-par 205, India scored the bulk of their 365. Indeed, the result owed much to the differing energy levels after a slug-fest on day two. For two sessions on Friday England had fought their way back into the contest through the burning desire of Ben Stokes and the enduring class of Jimmy Anderson, India stumbling to 153 for six at tea. That had come at a price, however, and once Rishabh Pant underlined his status as the true modern heir to Adam Gilchrist with an audacious century, it became a case of when, not if, India would prevail. The third day began with a passage of play that summed up one of England’s chief shortcomings. Dom Bess was asked to open proceedings in the latest bid to jump-start his confidence, only to ship 15 runs in two nervy overs and be whipped out of the attack as India made steady progress from their overnight 294 for seven. It took a run-out to halt a 106-run stand between Patel and Washington Sundar – the sixth time in five years England have conceded two century partnerships after the fall of the sixth wicket – and when Stokes wiped out Ishant Sharma and Mohammed Siraj, leaving Sundar high and dry on 96 not out, a 160-run deficit meant England batsmen chiefly playing for pride. Not much followed as, after lunch, Joe Root found himself walking out at No 4 inside the first eight overs of an innings for the fourth time this series. Ashwin had been the one to strike early, teasing an edge from Zak Crawley for his winter to finish with six single-figure scores from eight innings and then inflicting Bairstow’s third duck in four. It has been a huge task to adjust mid-series after two weeks at home and No 3 is a position Bairstow has taken on grudgingly after the gloves were taken off him 18 months ago. Here, he fiddled his first ball to leg slip and after averaging 19.5 in the past two years it is far from certain whether the 31-year-old will be seen again in Test cricket. At 10 for two, India knew they had England’s number once more and soon enough the scorecard read 65 for six when Root’s winter, one that began with three imposing hundreds, was ended in familiar fashion, lbw to Ashwin for 30, and slightly sore after an errant throw from Kohli struck his fellow captain in the box. The incident was laughed off by the pair and the fleeting pain probably did not compare with watching Dom Sibley and Stokes fall to the sweep shot – the former freakishly caught by the keeper off short-leg – or Ollie Pope stumped by Pant to end another skittish knock. But it summed up how much things had changed for Root since day one of the series when, cramping up after a masterful century, Kohli came to his aid and all the talk was of a fairytale 100th Test match for the England captain.