On The Late Show, Stephen Colbert addressed the ongoing fallout from Oprah Winfrey’s bombshell interview with the Duke and Duchess of Sussex. Buckingham Palace released a statement, saying that recollections of certain conversations may vary. Colbert said to them that “you better hope no one recollects any of this”. The statement also spoke about issues being dealt with privately. “I hear Prince Andrew has an island he goes to to address his privates,” he joked. Colbert went on to discuss the Good Morning Britain co-host Piers Morgan, who decided to leave the show after his controversial comments about Meghan. “Piers Morgan is such a baby someone at Buckingham Palace just asked what colour he’s going to be,” Colbert said. He continued: “Congratulations, tomorrow is going to be a great morning Britain.” Updated CDC guidelines have suggested that indoor dinner parties will soon be possible although Colbert worried about how prepared he might be after so much time not socialising. “My mug of ranch dressing is running low, am I supposed to eat my string cheese dry?” he joked. He also mentioned the stimulus cheques which are set to be sent out to US citizens. “I have a feeling a lot of Maga folks are about to accept the election results,” he said. On International Women’s Day, Joe Biden announced that two female generals will be promoted, news that Colbert called “so inspiring for all the little girls out there who dream of growing up and launching air strikes in Syria”. On Late Night, Seth Meyers mentioned the news that the president’s dogs have been sent back to the family home in Delaware after one of them bit a member of staff in the White House. “Under the last administration, that kind of behaviour would have made you press secretary,” he joked. Meyers also quipped that “Oprah will be interviewing them next Sunday at 8pm”. Authorities are looking into a connection between another arrested rioter from the January Capitol attack and Roger Stone. “I hope they’re able to connect the dot,” he said. He also spoke about a study that is being conducted to examine the effect that the pandemic has had on people’s mental health. “Lemme save you a few bucks: it’s been bad,” he said. After conversation around Pepe Le Pew normalising rape culture started again, the character has been removed from Space Jam 2. “He’s been Me Pewed,” Meyers quipped. On Jimmy Kimmel Live!, the host also spoke about the Biden dog situation. “When Trump’s dog misbehaves he sent his supporters to storm the Capitol and get him,” he joked. This week has also seen Trump complaining that money from donors has ended up being sent to Republicans who do nothing rather than straight to him directly. “They fed that fat little orange Mogwai after midnight and now he’s eating them alive,” he said.