The report of the Industrial Fatigue Board, issued to-day, on the rest pause in an unbroken working spell of five hours for women, may lead to a compulsory provision, as it sums up heavily in favour of the arguments for it. It would not, it is admitted, “always be possible in the case of continuous or semi-continuous processes to give such a rest to the whole of the workers simultaneously.” The pause – with opportunity for refreshment – should come fairly near the middle of the work-spell, and ten minutes is suggested. “The rest pause increases the efficiency of the workers, for in various occupations (with 4½-hour work spells) the immediate effect of introducing a rest was to increase output by 2.8 per cent, whilst the improvement in other groups of workers who were tested some months after the introduction of the rest amounted to 6.2 per cent. Also the introduction of the rest appeared to reduce the labour turnover greatly.” The rest pause is advocated for physiological reasons – the distance of the worker’s home from the factory which means that often the period between breakfast and dinner is six hours; and psychological reasons, dependent on the relief from monotony. A stimulant to flagging energies“Though direct statistical evidence is lacking, there is a widely held impression that a cup of tea acts as a powerful but harmless stimulant to flagging energies,” states the report. “One large firm visited by us are so convinced of its efficacy that they offer a free cup of tea or cocoa to every worker in the morning and afternoon work spells, and during the dinner hour.” As an instance of the effect on labour turnover, the case is quoted of a factory where workers were given a fifteen minutes’ rest pause in each work spell, during which they went to the canteen, and a free tea was provided in the afternoon. As an instance of the effect on labour turnover the cases are quoted of three-manufacturing confectionery works. At one, where the workers were given a fifteen minutes’ rest pause in each work spell, during which they went to the canteen and had a free tea provided in the afternoon, the percentage leaving during the years 1923 to 1925 was 21; at a second where the workers did not leave their places but had a three-minute pause in which to drink the tea provided by the management, the percentage was 52: at a third where no rests at all were allowed and the workers were discouraged from surreptitious feeding the percentage was 94. The main objections urged by employers against any kind of break for women were that such breaks resulted in the temporary idleness of highly paid skilled men; that there was loss of time and therefore decreased productivity, and that there was a loss of extra working time over and above the nominal ten or fifteen minutes’ break. After stating various ways in which the nominal duration of the rest pause could be kept to the report says: “The system of tea-drinking which struck us as the best and simplest was for each worker to bring her own tea in a vacuum flask. Thereby all were able to start their meal the moment the siren sounded, and they returned equally promptly to work at the end of their rest.”