In the month that both Judas and the Black Messiah and The Trial of the Chicago 7 have racked up multiple Oscar nominations, it’s another film, one well outside the Hollywood awards circuit, that’s bringing us up to date on the struggle for Black liberation. Unapologetic is an independently made documentary, following two young activists during four of the most tumultuous years in recent Chicago politics, as community anger mounted over the fatal police shootings of 22-year-old Rekia Boyd and 17-year-old Laquan McDonald. Director Ashley O’Shay was herself just 22 and fresh out of film school when she moved to the city and began filming: “Like, if you were in Chicago in the fall of 2015, you must have been living under a rock if you were not aware of what young, Black folks were doing.” If you were in Chicago in 2015, you must have been living under a rock if you were not aware of what young, Black folks were doing One of those was Janaé Bonsu, shown in the film balancing her organising work with Black Youth Project 100 with her PhD dissertation on “envisioning what safety looks like” outside the current criminal justice system. She says she quickly understood the aims of O’Shay’s project: “Social movements are way more than charismatic, male figureheads. She wanted to tell that and I wanted to be a part of that.” Ambrell “Bella BAHHS” Gambrell, who first learned about leadership through West Side street gangs, was a little more wary: “My experience within organising in Chicago, it’s been different than a lot of my peers because it was all scholars and people in academia. All the people I know who organised communities was hood. Like, it had nothing to do with the theories, nothing nobody read in a book – it was about protecting where you’re from.” These days, Gambrell is a self-described “raptivist” who uses her art and life experience to bridge divides in the movement. “Even just last year, with all the uprisings; that was a very different population of people than the people who get put on the mics to talk about what’s going on. I move in both circles.”