Re your many articles and letters on women’s safety, the education of boys and changes in the law will indeed be necessary to address this. But tinkering with the law will do little without changing the zeitgeist. PSHE lessons have been trying to address this problem in schools for years. What needs addressing is the covert education of boys and girls on the internet and by the media. The biggest impediments for women who are the focus of domestic violence and less inclined to report it are also practical. Where do you go? What do you live on? Without these issues being addressed by the government, not just charities, little will change. Those stuck in this destructive environment are bound to be reluctant to report anything that will leave them in a worse position. I hope this will not just be another opportunity for celebrities, politicians and outspoken citizens to get their moment in the news and then move on to the next issue. Has the Black Lives Matter campaign resulted in real lasting change? Has the school history curriculum changed or new courses for police been provided nationwide? Real change needs practical solutions and financial investment. The government has the power to do this – or is a candle on the doorstep of No 10 their only investment to protect half of their fellow citizens?Janet CawserRipley, Derbyshire • Luke Hart’s contributions (‘The time for men to step up is right now!’: what all men can do to help end violence against women, 17 March) are so important. Where does the “entitlement and resentment that underpins everything” arise? Might it at least sometimes start with “putting up a facade” that is “part of being a bloke”? Some years ago, when working with teenage boys on a course to challenge attitudes to violence, I put it to them that the majority aren’t the confident tough lads that they like to pretend they are. Actually, they are fearful and self-questioning to some extent, trying to sort out the myths and lies in the puzzling world of social relationships. Their response was revealing. Grins and nods all round. Recognition and, for some, relief.John AirsLiverpool • I became a pro-feminist man from being around feminist women and listening to them. And 16 years ago that led to White Ribbon UK, which campaigns for men to challenge male violence and abuse. More men are realising that silence is not an option. It excuses the violence and the culture. Because men have supported the culture that condones abuse, it is our responsibility to challenge it. Pledge never to remain silent, and start discussions with your friends and family about challenging male entitlement. It isn’t enough to sign a pledge or wear a badge, but it’s a start. Chris GreenFounder, White Ribbon UK • What a refreshing article by Aubrey Allegretti (Beyond Equality charity works with teenage boys to ‘create safer streets’ ,16 March). Why does this government continue with token offerings to improve the safety of women? Its feeble suggestion is street lighting and CCTV. A properly funded educational programme for young males is a better approach.Sharon WallMoseley, Birmingham • I am so fed up with the attitude that women’s needs will only be considered when women are allowed in the room (Editorial, 16 March). How about the men in the room taking responsibility to consider the needs of all people in society, and asking themselves who is excluding women from the room?Moira HicksLondon