A government fund established to prop up the arts and heritage sectors during the coronavirus pandemic has handed over little more than half of the money it has allocated, Whitehall’s spending watchdog has discovered. The National Audit Office said the culture recovery fund had budgeted for £830m in grants and loans funding so far, but only £495m had been paid out. MPs have responded angrily to the findings, urging the government to hand over the cash while “there are still organisations left to support”. The Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport (DCMS) announced the £1.57bn fund to help the cultural, arts and heritage institutions survive the pandemic last summer. It has supported about 3,000 arts organisations in England so far, including venues such as the Royal Albert Hall and Southbank Centre in London, and M&S Bank Arena in Liverpool. The fund was increased by £300m in the budget earlier this month, with the culture secretary, Oliver Dowden, saying: “It’s such a relief we can look ahead now so this funding is not just about survival but for planning and preparing for the reopening of theatres, galleries and gigs.” But auditors have examined the allocation of the funds so far and found that of the £1bn that has been made available, about £830m in grants and loans has been awarded to different organisations but only £495m of that has been paid out, auditors said. The department has assumed, in the worst-case scenario, that social distancing would remain until the end of March this year, auditors pointed out, and that demand for theatre tickets and venue capacity would remain at 40% of pre-Covid-19 levels. But the current situation exceeds this worst-case scenario. Meg Hillier, the chair of the public accounts committee, urged payments to arms-length bodies to be sped up. “Many across the sector will have welcomed the funding announced last summer. But eight months later, more than half of the £1bn made available so far is still waiting in the wings. “With the sector’s shutdown already past government’s worst-case scenario, DCMS needs to get support out to organisations while there are still organisations left to support,” she said. Thursday’s report said the DCMS aimed to support the survival of 75% of the organisations in the sector at risk during 2020-21. Museums, galleries, cinemas, music venues and theatres had to close in March last year when the UK entered the first national lockdown. Some reopened partially in the summer and autumn but many have remained entirely or mostly closed for nearly a year. The DCMS predicted that without targeted support organisations would run out of money around the end of September 2020, the report said. The department has not yet paid out any money from the second phase of funding, totalling £400m, comprised of funding not awarded in the first funding phase plus £258m that it held back as contingency. London has received 31% of total revenue grant funding, followed by the north-west and the south-east of England, which each received 12%, auditors said. Responding to the report, a DCMS spokesperson said: “It is right that we get funding out quickly with the safeguards taxpayers would expect to see in such a huge investment, and much more money has been invested into the sector since this report was compiled. “Applications are being processed for a £400m second round of grants and loans, and an additional £300m announced at the Budget will help the hardest hit reopen and recover. This brings direct support for the culture sector to almost £2bn.”