This bonus-point win – Wales’s third of the 2021 Six Nations – has moved Wayne Pivac’s side to within just one game of a shock grand slam. Wales’s latest victory was never in any doubt given Italy’s awful championship record and now only France stand between the victors and a second clean sweep in three years. Given they won only three games in 2020, the Welsh turnaround has been as surprising as it has been remarkable. The last hurdle for them to overcome will be in Paris on the final weekend. Even if they were to lose at the Stade de France, Wales would still be in a good position to win the title given their points difference. Of course, their target will be far more ambitious than that. Unfortunately, it must be said Franco Smith’s Italy plumbed new depths of paucity against Wales, who ran riot with the hooker Ken Owens scoring twice in the first half. Josh Adams and Taulupe Faletau also crossed. After the break George North, Callum Sheedy and Louis Rees-Zammit completed the rout as Italy lost two men to yellow cards. Pivac warned France his team are now like “chalk and cheese” compared to the one France beat twice last year. “We are very pleased to be four from four and to have an opportunity for a grand slam, but we need to improve for France. We are going to be in for a massive game,” the Wales head coach said. “We know the pain we went through in the autumn and they certainly weren’t the results we were after, but this championship was always going to be a line in the sand for us. “France are going to be a different proposition. In our previous two games with them we’ve been on the wrong end of the result and we’re in for a massive challenge.” In blissful Rome sunshine, Italy’s start couldn’t have been worse. Luca Bigi immediately coughed up a penalty which Dan Biggar slotted. The returning scrum-half Gareth Davies took a quick tap and was tackled by Bigi who was not back 10 metres and saw yellow. Davies promptly found Biggar whose inch-perfect long pass sent Adams in at the corner. Rees-Zammit then sent Faletau over following fine buildup work from Adams. Frankly, it was men against boys. Smith had his head in his hands with Wales scoring at a point a minute. Wales’ intensity was excellent, but they were not being tested at all. Owens was driven over for a rare try from a driving lineout which dismantled the Italian pack and Biggar converted. Wales’s forwards were having a field day and the bonus-point try arrived within half an hour. Owens’ second did the damage from another driving surge. Wales’ fifth arrived a handful of minutes into the second period. Biggar found Jonathan Davies and his neat short pass to midfield partner North allowed him to waltz to the line. North was immediately removed after equalling Shane Williams’ Welsh championship try record of 22 and got his feet up with France in mind. Out of nowhere Italy finally got on the scoreboard when Monty Ioane chipped over Rees-Zammit to score. Adams also had a try ruled out for being in touch. The Italy replacement prop Marco Riccioni was shown yellow for leading into Willis Halaholo high and with his forearm. It could well have been a red card. Sheedy’s first try for Wales on the hour mark set Wales up to run riot in the final quarter. Josh Navidi, the man of the match, produced some fine hands to send Sheedy over. There was still time for Rees-Zammit to intercept Carlo Canna’s poor pass and even from his 22, no one was going to stop him going the length. It proved to be the final score, but Wales will now go to Paris in rude health and on the verge of glory. Navidi said: “We got the job done and we knew it was going to be an open game. We really enjoyed it and we’ll look forward to next week.”