Pakistan’s prime minister, Imran Khan, has tested positive for coronavirus and is self-isolating, according to the country’s health minister. Khan, 68, a former international cricketer, has been holding frequent meetings lately, and addressed a security conference in the capital, Islamabad, that was attended by a large number of people, according to Reuters. He addressed the conference without wearing a mask, and attended another gathering to inaugurate a housing project for disadvantaged people in a similar fashion on Friday, a day after he was vaccinated against Covid. Pakistan has seen a sharp rise in coronavirus infections, though the scale of the crisis remains less serious than in many western nations. Partial lockdown restrictions have recently been reintroduced in parts of Pakistan in response to the rising cases. According to government figures, 3,876 people tested positive over the past 24 hours, the highest number of daily infections since early July, taking the cumulative total past 620,000. There were also 42 more deaths, taking the total to 13,799. Khan received his first dose of the Sinopharm coronavirus vaccine on Thursday. It takes a few weeks to build immunity. Khan tested positive on Saturday after developing a “slight cough”, his spokesperson said, and he now has a mild fever. “Please do not link it to the corona vaccine. Immunity develops a few weeks after the vaccine is given. Make sure to vaccinate your elders and loved ones. Be careful,” the spokesperson said. The prime minister was probably infected before he got the vaccine shot, during a series of public engagements this week, the information minister, Shibli Faraz, told the Geo News television channel. Footage was broadcast of Khan receiving the jab in an apparent attempt to allay serious hesitancy among parts of the population. Pakistan’s inoculation campaign began on 10 March, starting with elderly people. Last year as the pandemic started, Khan told the nation in an address that “97% of patients fully recover”, though he later warned that “people are not taking it seriously”.