The elephant was too big, the lion was too fierce and the camel was too grumpy. For nearly 40 years, the characters of Dear Zoo have successfully convinced generations of children that wild animals belong in zoos – and that most definitely do not make good pets. Now, the author of the children’s classic, Rod Campbell, wants to convey an altogether different and more serious message to families today about the endangered species in his most famous book: “We need to look after them better.” In Look After Us, a new, non-fiction companion to Dear Zoo, Campbell attempts to introduce the concept of conservation to toddlers. Many of the much-loved animals from the pages of the original book are now threatened with extinction, he gently reveals, along with orangutans, tigers and whales. “I thought there probably aren’t many books for the very youngest children about this topic, because it is difficult,” Campbell, 75, told the Observer in a rare interview. “It was a question of: how do you say that animals are dwindling in a way that a young child will understand?” He decided the best way was to write a picture book from the perspective of someone who tries to find their favourite animals, and then discovers there aren’t many of them left. Like in Dear Zoo, which has sold over eight million copies worldwide and is a perennial top-10 picture book in the UK, an animal hides behind each flap of the book and is only revealed when the flap is opened. But, unlike in Dear Zoo, the flaps in the new book depict these animals in their natural habitats, not in crates and boxes. The animals do not belong in a zoo, but in the wild – where, the narrator explains, they are endangered. “Really, it’s like planting a seed in children’s minds,” Campbell says. “I think, if you come to the idea of conservation when you’re young, it stays with you. And I think it grows.” He deliberately ends the book with an uplifting message: a huge, final flap, which reveals that, because “kind people” have looked after the whale, it is thriving in the sea. “That’s the reward, if you like. Thanks to these kind people, look how happy the whales are – and how many they are,” he says. He hopes parents will be able to use the book to talk to their very young children about the challenges that endangered species face. For example, they can discuss the simple message that if you don’t look after the wild animals you love, there will be fewer of them in the future. “And if you do, those animals will always be there.” Since he wrote Dear Zoo, he notes that many zoos are now conservation parks and play an important role in wildlife preservation. “The numbers have diminished so much in the wild. But at least we have small populations in zoo-like conditions so, at the very least, we can teach children about them.” He still remembers the day he came up with the concept for Dear Zoo. “I thought: well, children do like animals, and the flap has got to be legitimate, it’s got to be doing something essential – the content, the text and the flap all have to work together. So what if the flap was a box or something? And I immediately thought of zoos, because when they send an animal from one place to another, it goes in a crate.” He sat down to draw his characters and make the flaps. “It was during an afternoon that all these thoughts were going on in my head. And I ended up making a dummy with thick paper to see how it looked, in that one afternoon.” He read the prototype he’d created to the 18-month-old son of a friend. “He was quiet all the way through, and when I got to the end, he said ‘again’. So I read it again and he went ‘again’. And I read it again, and then he said, ‘again, again’. And he was sort of leaping about.” Campbell says that the enduring popularity of Dear Zoo has been “quite alarming really. And wonderful. I’ve been very fortunate.”