I don’t know why I’m writing about this really, because nothing happened. Compared to what happens, nothing really happened. And in the five minutes it took to not happen – between 4.55pm and 5pm yesterday – he was never closer to me than three feet. What a respectful distance from which to be called a “dirty cunt”, my ha-di-ha-ha brain is saying. I was merely verbally aggressed by a stranger in a socially distanced way. Plus it all feels a bit convenient for a columnist, right? And I agree – being followed and simultaneously screamed at by some guy I’d never clapped eyes on before yesterday afternoon was nothing if not convenient. Look, I’m writing a column about it today. But before this outbreak of convenience, this column honestly was going to be a fictional imagining of the royal family attending implicit bias training. I don’t want you to conclude I didn’t have other wares for this space if it hadn’t been for the convenient nothing that happened. I’m absolutely and completely fine, I said to my editor, when I told him what I’d write about instead. Really, it’s just – [don’t say “part of life”, don’t say “part of life”] – it’s just part of life! I told him the truth, that I genuinely forget about these things soon after they happen. Except I’m writing this stupid record of this one now. Should have just tied a weight round it and sent it to sleep with the fishes, with all the other ones. The healthy option. But please, I said to him, please tell me if it comes out wrong. I never say that with any other column, but of course we ladies worry about telling our own stories wrongly or unsuccessfully. Anyway, I’m walking to collect one of my children after school yesterday, down the street I always take. It’s never lovelier than now, when all the magnolias are coming out. He stares hard, passes. Stops. Behind me: “What are you looking at?” Honestly? The end of the street. How is it that the end of this empty London street, where there’s a busier road and then a square, has suddenly stretched to a point somewhere just beyond Moscow? What happens to time and space when these nothings happen? This whole nothing is going to take five minutes, yet feel so long it’s like I could have learned Mandarin, or written a novel. You absorb every incidental detail. Just in case! And in every split second, you’re somehow able to consider multiple possible theories as to what is, or isn’t, happening. “I’m talking to you. Fucking turn round.” Really? Today? When it starts not happening, I’m just thinking: oh, but this is such a COINCIDENCE! I mean, I’ve spent all day reading women’s stories of nowhere near all the things that have happened to them just walking down streets. Maybe this is happening because I didn’t offer up my own stories. Maybe I’ve angered the social media gods. “Dirty cunt.” Man, this guy is really ruining the magnolias for me. I’m walking so fast now I’m not even looking at the magnolias. Still, this is SUCH a coincidence. Actually, let’s be statistically rational. It’s just an incidence. Whenever these nothings happen, you understand very powerfully that they are singling you out to tell you you’re not special. You, a 46-year-old woman in a double bobble hat that makes you look like Mickey Mouse, which is why you chose it, are not special. Right now, at 4.56pm on a spring afternoon, countless women are being harassed in the street. I wonder what a UK heat map of incidence would look like. Hot, I guess. He’s walking alongside me now. “Hello? HELLO?” Quick, do the triage. How seriously do I take him? He hasn’t grabbed me, so my sense is that he’s one of the good street harassers. That would be great news for this fucking whore currently being asked who the fuck she thinks she is. Hang on, he’s got a shopping bag. New data points, need to establish what’s in it. Oh. A really big box of chocolates. I wonder if he’s saying sorry to someone. Or maybe I love you. “I love you. Also, you’ll never guess what I did on the way home.” He seems to be wearing A Distinctive Jacket, which is pointless, since I’m not going to be troubling the police with this. You can’t, can you? Where would you start. Where would you stop. Hopefully he’ll stop. On the back of the jacket – thank God, I’m seeing the back of his jacket now, which means he’s passed me by again – it says “The Wonderers”. They sound nice. I wonder what he’s wondering about. Why I’m some fucking lesbian whore is what he’s saying. But I wonder what he’s really wondering about. If this is the bit he’s saying out loud, I wonder about the inner monologue. Oh dear. Now I’m seeing the front of his jacket again, and he’s coming back towards me. Can’t he see there are now people around, because I’ve reached the square? But he’s one of the ones that doesn’t mind an audience. What do people who can now see us think is happening, I wonder crossly. Crossly enough to find my voice and say: Stay away from me. I say it loudly and clearly, so the two guys working on the road about 15 metres away will hear. They look up, and I look right at them, quickly because I daren’t take my eyes off The Wonderer. But then they carry on with their work. Come on guys – don’t you read the internet? Hashtag be an ally! Given I’m still learning what a fucking bitch I am, and at quite some volume, I say it again. STAY AWAY FROM ME. I can see I’m holding my hand out in a stop sign. Who am I – the street harassment Gandalf? My hand seems a little shaky. Let’s be real. If he wants to, this street harasser shall pass. He hangs around even as I pick up my son, so we get a great send-off as we hurry away. I used to think holding the hands of children, tightly, would exempt you from the consideration of street abusers, but I’ve long noticed that for some guys, it simply makes it more special. “Why was he doing it if you didn’t say anything to him?” wonders my son. I know! It does seem very irrational, doesn’t it. What a silly man. “He’s like The Angry Man,” notes my son, which is what my children called some other guy who followed us down our own road screaming about something to do with their bikes. Exactly, I say. “Why are they so angry?” Oh wow … I don’t know. I mean, there are … a lot of theories. Anyway, how was school? “Fine. Why are we going home this way?” Because this is the way we go now. We’re probably going to go a few different ways for a bit. So this is one of the ways we go now. Let’s just get home. I mean, nothing really happened. Still, good question, all things considered. Why are they so angry? It does feel like way, way, way past time we found out. Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnist