A landmark report on racial disparity has criticised the use of the term “institutional racism” and says other factors, such as family influence, socioeconomic background and religion, have more “significant impact” on life chances than the existence of racism. The report, by the Commission on Race and Ethnic Disparities, has been described by race equality campaigners as “deeply cynical”. The review behind the report was set up by Downing Street to investigate racial disparities in the UK in response to the Black Lives Matter protests last summer, and it marks a significant shift in government policy, stating its findings “present a new race agenda for the country”. The commission’s report notes that while racism and racial injustice do still exist “we no longer see a Britain where the system is deliberately rigged against ethnic minorities”. The commission has been widely criticised by campaigners and unions, with some accusing the review of denying the experiences of black and minority ethnic people. The 258-page report calls on the government to fully fund the Equality and Human Rights Commission, improve training for police officers and include a local residency requirement for recruitment. Within 24 recommendations it advocates establishing an office for health disparities, opening up access to apprenticeships, teaching an “inclusive curriculum”, and putting a stop to use of the term BAME. It also pushes for a move of focus away from institutions and more towards “the extent [that] individuals and their communities could help themselves through their own agency, rather than wait for invisible external forces to assemble to do the job”. In an open rebuff to the arguments of the Black Lives Matter movement, and the protests that erupted after the death of George Floyd in the US, the report says the “idealism” of “well-intentioned young people” promoting the dominant feature in society as being institutional racism, achieves little “beyond alienating the decent centre ground”. Responding to one of the most contentious passage in the report, which argues that a “new story” needs to be told about the slave trade, which would highlight cultural transformation of African people, Marsha De Cordova, the shadow equalities minister, said: “The government must urgently explain how they came to publish content which glorifies the slave trade, and immediately disassociate themselves with these remarks.” The TUC general secretary, Frances O’Grady, said the commission had “chosen to deny the experiences of black and minority ethnic workers”, and said that institutional racism trapped people in poverty, insecurity and low pay. “Institutional and structural racism exists in the UK, in both the labour market and wider society,” she said. “Black and minority ethnic workers are far more likely than white workers to be in low-paid, insecure jobs such as temporary and agency jobs or zero hours contracts.” The conclusion of the report notes that while most of the Black Lives Matters protesters are young, the bulk of the commission are from “an older generation whose views were formed by growing up in the 1970s and 1980s”. But it states that because of the progress that has been made over the past 50 years “a degree of optimism is justified”. Sunder Katwala, director of British Future, said: “Black and Asian Britons in our society today face less prejudice than their parents or grandparents, they may well fare better than those in many other countries. But such comparisons make little difference to the lives of ethnic minority Britons in 2021. “There’s an important success story in education that can rightly be celebrated. But if a graduate in Manchester with an ethnic-sounding surname still gets fewer job interviews than a white classmate with the same cv, why should they feel lucky that the odds might be worse in Milan or Marseille?” The Labour leader, Sir Keir Starmer, said he was disappointed by the findings from the summary of the report published, insisting there were structural problems that needed to be addressed. He told reporters, during a visit in Leeds: “I haven’t seen the full report yet and obviously I’ll want to read that. I’ve seen the briefings and I’m disappointed. On the one hand there’s an acknowledgement of the problems, the issues, the challenges that face many black and minority ethnic communities. But, on the other hand there’s a reluctance to accept that that’s structural.” Rehana Azam, the GMB national secretary for public services, said: “Only this government could produce a report on race in the 21st century that actually gaslights Black, Asian, minority and ethnic people and communities. This feels like a deeply cynical report that not only ignores black and ethnic minority workers’ worries and concerns but is part of an election strategy to divide working-class people and voters. It’s completely irresponsible and immoral. “Institutional racism exists, it’s the lived experience of millions of black and ethnic minority workers. We’re paid less, we’re more likely to be in high-risk jobs during the pandemic, we’re more likely to die from Covid, we’re more likely to be stopped and searched, to be arrested and to go to prison.” In response to the report, the Institute of Race Relations said: “From what we have seen, both the findings and the recommendations of the government-commissioned Commission on Race and Ethnic Disparities report fit neatly with the government’s attempts, post-Brexit, to portray the British nation as a beacon of good race relations and a diversity model, in the report’s words, for ‘white majority countries’ across the globe. “The methodology of the report appears to be one that, in severing issues of race from class and treating issues of structural racism as ‘historic’ but not contemporary, leads to the stigmatisation of some ethnic minorities on the back of the valorisation of others. Black Caribbeans, for instance, are contrasted with Black Africans, and deemed to have internalised past injustices to the detriment of their own social advancement.” The Institute of Race Relations added that the report signalled “the post-Macpherson narrative on institutional racism that the government will be most eager to sideline”. Lady Falkner, chair of the Equality and Human Rights Commission, said: “Race inequality is complex and there are links with other factors such as social and family background, poverty and geography. This report rightly identifies the varied causes of disparities and by making recommendations to address them gives the government the opportunity to design policy targeting the sources of inequality. “There are a number of recommendations we can play a leading role in, and we welcome the recognition that additional funding would help us carry out our important work to tackle discrimination and disadvantage. “While Britain has made great progress towards race equality in the last 50 years, there is still much more to do. As the report says, we need to find a way to take our successes, learn from them, and apply them to where we need to make further improvements. A joined-up approach is needed. Now is the time for action and we are ready to play our part.” Tonight join Guardian journalist Joseph Harker and guest speakers for an online event, the Brixton riots 40 years on: What has changed for Black Britons? Exploring four decades of protest and resistance at 7pm BST/8pm CEST/11am PDT/ 2pm EDT. Book at gu.com/guardianlive