Many years ago, on leaving university, I was asked to go to a windowless office in the Mall to see if I might be interested in becoming an agent of the British secret service. Over a series of interviews, it became clear that I was not cut out to be George Smiley, let alone James Bond. A single bit of wisdom that I picked up in that process has never left me, though. At one point, the interviewer set out the hypothetical details of a complex conflict in a distant corner of the world in which I was theoretically stationed. What steps would I take to advise the desk in London of how to respond to this crisis? I set out a few embarrassing platitudes about gathering information from all sides, before coming to a firm opinion and a clear course of action. When I’d finished, my interviewer leaned back in his chair. “There is a crucial question you haven’t asked yourself,” he said. “There is?” “Why do we need to have a strong, settled opinion about this conflict at all?” In the years since, as strong, settled opinions about everything from homeschooling to hijabs have apparently become essential markers of personal identity, I’ve often been reminded of that put-down. It came to mind watching Oprah’s interview with Meghan and Harry and the inevitable, fevered which-side-are-you-on? arguments that followed. “Do I need to have a strong, settled opinion about this?” a voice in my head asked. On balance, I guessed, “probably not”. Life’s Edge, a new book by Carl Zimmer, science columnist for the New York Times, explores the history of thinking about what it means to be alive. The most newsworthy chapter centres on the nature of viruses. When viruses – “oily bubbles of genes” – were first properly identified in the 1930s, Zimmer suggests, they appeared to occupy a new category of existence: they mutated, but they did not grow or eat or reproduce. They were “not as alive as an eel or dead as a rock”. In the past year, we may feel we have got to know the habits of one particular virus – Sars-CoV-2 – too well. As Zimmer points out, there are plenty more viruses for us to discover, not least the 140,000-plus species now known to exist, generally quite happily, in our gut. Are they alive or dead? The scientific and philosophical jury is still out. Rupert Murdoch turned 90 last week. There was a time when it looked like he might be slowing down, contemplating the end – out of that imagined last act, the drama of Succession was born. Since his marriage to Jerry Hall, however, he has seemed as up for the fight as ever. His mother lived to be 103. Executives at News Corp long ago coined the euphemism “in 30 years” to tread carefully around the post-Rupert future. Apparently, depressingly, the phrase is still in use. So far this year, daily life outside has been like watching football on TV without the simulated crowd reaction. Last week, though, I was stopped in my tracks by the return of the most joyous background noise of any street: that high-pitched cacophony of schoolchildren yelling and screaming and running every which way in a blustery playground, just because they can. Martin Buber, the philosopher, had a nice term for it: “Play is the exultation of the possible.” Just as good, as I stood listening, was a sudden memory of that childhood hymn that described “rough and tumble, rattle and noise”. • Tim Adams is an Observer columnist