Derek McInnes has left Aberdeen after eight years in charge of the club. He departs after a run of two wins in 10 matches, which has left Aberdeen trailing third-placed Hibernian by three points in the Scottish Premiership. “Derek and I reviewed where we were and agreed that this was the right time for him to step down,” said Cormark. Aberdeen Football Club and Manager, Derek McInnes, have agreed to part company after eight years. The manager and his assistant, Tony Docherty, will leave the Club with immediate effect. McInnes took charge of Aberdeen in 2013 and led the club to their first piece of silverware in two decades the following year when they beat Inverness on penalties to win the League Cup at Celtic Park. The 49-year-old also steered the club to four second-placed finishes and was almost lured away from Pittodrie, being strongly linked with his former club Rangers in 2017, and rejecting overtures from Sunderland in the same year. Pressure mounted on McInnes after a run of poor displays, culminating in last Saturday’s goalless home draw against Hamilton. “During his time in charge Derek raised the bar and delivered a level of consistency not seen at the club for many years, qualifying for Europe each season and delivering a memorable Scottish League Cup win at Celtic Park,” Cormack said. “Clearly, results since the turn of the year have been disappointing and frustrating for everyone. “The club now has the opportunity to appoint a new manager ahead of the new season where, with a number of players out of contract, we have work to do to build a competitive squad.” The former Rangers chairman Dave King has said the club's title win is vindication for his appointment of Steven Gerrard. "I'm absolutely of the view that if we hadn't brought Steven in we wouldn't have won the league this year," King said. "When I look back at all of the options available to me at the time, he was the one person I felt could win us the league," King added. "We had Premier League managers available to us, far more experienced men, but I knew what Steven could do." King also told Sky Sports he wants both Rangers and Celtic to push each other on in Europe. "Celtic were winning trophy after trophy in Scotland but then competing very poorly in Europe," the 65-year-old said. "I felt that was detrimental to Scottish football." "I'd like to think that Rangers [will] do better in Europe. I'm hoping Celtic will also kick on," added King, who stepped down from the Rangers board in March 2020. "We're not far away from automatic Champions League qualification and that is so important to Scottish football, not just Rangers and Celtic." McInnes’s assistant Tony Docherty also leaves with immediate effect and Aberdeen will be led through their remaining six league games by an interim team of Paul Sheerin, Barry Robson and Neil Simpson. “This season has been unprecedented due to a number of factors and I am as frustrated as anyone that results haven’t been of the high standard which we set,” said McInnes. “My motivation to deliver success has never wavered and during my eight-year tenure my staff and I have worked hard to elevate expectations and set a minimum standard which should be demanded at a club like Aberdeen. “I would like to thank all the players who have featured in my teams over the years, my current staff and players for their efforts and all the staff behind the scenes for their hard work and endeavour. “To the supporters for their continuous backing and, of course, the board for their support during my time at the club.”