When Alison Phipps, of Glasgow University, launched a new programme of grants for small community organisations working to tackle violence against women and girls in some of the world’s poorest countries, she had no idea that just three days later she would be told to pause the project, remove the notice about it, and that the future of the entire £2m global research scheme she runs would be in jeopardy. Her research programme, funded by the UK Research and Innovation Agency, draws together cultural organisations from countries including Ghana, Palestine and Zimbabwe, that aim to help build peace and support women. She was stunned by the sudden announcement on the UKRI website on Thursday last week that its budget for international development research had been nearly halved, from £245m to £125m. UKRI has confirmed that in all, 900 projects have been affected. Phipps was in a meeting with other researchers when the letter went up. “People were in tears. We are all responding as though we have been physically assaulted,” she says. “We are being offered advice from people in other countries who have experience of working with governments who are corrupt or cancel contracts with impunity,” she adds. The academic, who is Unesco chair for refugee integration through languages and the arts and professor of languages and intercultural studies at Glasgow, says that during the pandemic there has been a sharp increase in violence against women in some countries, and “an increase in the impregnation of girls as a result of lockdown and extreme poverty”. Researchers say what shocked them even more than the daunting scale of the cuts, was the unprecedented news that they would be applied to grants that had already been awarded. UKRI confirmed some projects would be “terminated”, and others “reprofiled” or reduced. Experts say they have no idea what “reprofiling” means, and that the agency has refused to say when it will explain where the cuts will fall. This week the first stream of unlucky academics received emails confirming that their funded research projects had been cancelled. Others said they were incessantly checking their inboxes. An open letter from academics condemning the cuts has received more than 3,000 signatures. On Sunday, Phipps and four colleagues wrote to the Arts and Humanities Research Council, part of UKRI, to resign their positions on its international development advisory panel, saying they refused to “be associated with or placed in a position of responsibility” for the government’s cuts, or the way UKRI is carrying them out. Dr Giuditta Fontana, a political scientist at the University of Birmingham, was notified by UKRI on Monday that her research project, which aims to bring together Albanian and Serbian schools in Kosovo to try to build bridges in the conflict-torn country, has been cancelled. “It is horrific,” she says. “This work has taken a year of planning. To have our confirmed funding cancelled is unbelievable.” Like all projects supported by the UKRI’s Global Challenges research fund (GCRF), Fontana’s team was already working closely with local partners, including an NGO specialising in conflict resolution, as well as employing researchers and administrators in Kosovo. Edona Maloku, a lecturer in Kosovo, who was leading the project from that end says: “Hearing that the project is being cancelled was heartbreaking. We were supposed to initiate school collaborations soon. It feels like it has all been lost.” Prof Lisa Dikomitis, director of the institute for global health at Keele University, who has four research projects in Official Development Assistance (ODA) countries that are now up in the air, says researchers are distraught that they are letting down local people, often in the poorest communities. “Researchers may now have to go back to communities and say ‘You know that project we’ve been working on for a year? Well, it’s not happening’. That’s hard for the researchers, but it’s devastating for the community,” she says. “These are the people at the receiving end of aid, the locals depending on the public health interventions and on the research results.” Adam Baird, an expert in crime and gang violence at Coventry University, has spent the week having “very painful, heartbreaking” conversations with international partners, telling them their project on reducing homicide in some of the most vulnerable populations in Latin America has been cancelled. “As principal investigator, it turned to me to relay to all our partners that although we had been told we can go ahead, we can’t,’ he says. “They were flabbergasted. A partner in Brazil said ‘Adam, this is the sort of thing we expect to happen in Brazil, but not in Britain’.” Even the most prestigious ODA research projects are at risk. Prof Heaven Crawley is director of the £20m UKRI-funded migration for development and equality (Mideq) hub, which is based at Coventry University but involves around 90 researchers and 20 support people in 13 countries. Even though is the largest GCRF research hub UKRI funds, the first Crawley heard of the cuts was when the letter went up on the website. Apart from being “completely disrespectful”, it meant her international partners found out at the same time as her, and she had “no idea what to tell them”. Dr Bonayi Hubert Dabiré who leads Mideq’s work in Burkina Faso, emailed her this week saying: “This is really violent information because we were not expecting it at all. It calls into question the longstanding relationships of trust that we have built with the associations and public institutions around this project, that have raised so much hope.” He wants to know what happens now – a question Crawley cannot answer. Crawley says: “The ripple effects of this will be huge. The whole idea behind GCRF funding is that this has to be research that changes communities, so there are lots of organisations wrapped around our projects doing things that make a difference to people’s lives, whether that’s providing information to migrants about their rights, or supporting local NGOs working to reduce poverty and inequalities. There are more than 50 people in ODA countries whose full salaries are paid by this funding, and many others who are partly paid by it. These are incomes for families who depend on this money to eat.” UKRI says projects must focus on employing early career researchers and women in the countries they are helping. Crawley says they will be hit hard by these cuts. In the UK, too, young researchers are badly affected. Dr Simon Rushton, an expert in global health politics at Sheffield University, says one of the most talented young postdoctorates on his team has just been told his project in Colombia has been pulled. The researcher had been awarded his first big grant in January, helping local people to establish projects to pull them out of poverty, including a coffee-growing co-operative and finding legal uses for coca crops. Rushton organised a party on Zoom to celebrate. Now, the researcher has lost the funding that paid his salary for the next year and a half, and is frantically looking for a job. “It is brutal,” Rushton says. “It’s an amazing project and based on him spending two years building trust with these indigenous communities. That trust is now completely broken.” The UKRI’s chief executive, Prof Ottoline Leyser, says: “We understand the distress caused by the cuts being made to our ODA [official development assistance] funding and the deep anxiety felt by researchers. Given the situation in which we find ourselves, our focus is to preserve as much of the benefit as possible from the extensive portfolio of UKRI-funded ODA research and innovation. “Over the past year we have seen just how important it is to share knowledge across borders. ODA funding remains a high priority for UKRI and we are determined to continue working collaboratively to tackle many of the pressing challenges facing the UK and the rest of the world in the months and years ahead.”