The war in Yemen did not start on 26 March 2015. But that was when it became seemingly intractable. The morning of that day, the first Saudi bombs rained down on the capital, Sana’a, which the Houthis had captured the previous autumn. Less than a month later, a Saudi-drafted UN security council resolution demanded that the Houthis surrender unconditionally to a government that had fled Yemen to exile in a Riyadh hotel. Such improbable terms, because they would not be agreed to, provided retrospective justification for the Saudis having already pulled the trigger – and for the continuation of their war. For six years, these surrender ultimatums have manifestly failed. Yet despite Joe Biden’s “Diplomacy is back” announcement, they continue to form the basis for the United States’ preconditions for talks, as well as for the Saudi-proposed peace initiative this week. With an identical approach of “you must blink first” laid before the Iranians over nuclear talks, the US is in danger of leading itself into impasses in more than one of its dealings in the Middle East. The futility is most transparent, however, in Yemen: when the Houthis control even more of the country than in 2015, how is it realistic to expect them to accept surrender? Rather than both sides haggling over ceasefires, the US must offer a vision that reimagines what a power-sharing settlement can look like. But to do so, it must first be understood how and why the war began. It started with the attempted imposition of a federal structure by the government. Yemenis on all sides – including the Houthis – had, through a national dialogue, agreed on federalism in principle. But there was disagreement on how the regions would be delineated. Against the strong advice of the UN, the government sought to impose a six-region federal solution: it would confine the Houthis to a poor, mountainous territory with no access to the sea or natural resources; separately, the south would be split into two regions against the wishes of southerners and socialists. In the face of strong opposition, the government pushed its delineation as a fait accompli. Also, against the advice of the UN, instead of broadening the make-up of the government, as had been agreed in the national dialogue, a cabinet reshuffle only reinforced its old composition, to the exclusion of the Houthis. Their response was to resort to violence and achieve their political objectives through military means – even after they had pledged to settle their differences through political dialogue. Six years later, the world’s worst humanitarian crisis is the outcome. A political settlement must address these contentious issues. Redrawing the territories of the federal state must take into account the new realities on the ground – and this will take time. But they do not have to be agreed before peace can begin. A set of principles in a peace agreement could mandate an independent body to delineate the boundaries of the federal regions. A peace agreement that does not take into account such considerations will collapse. Unyielding commitment to preconditions for talks are the trees that prevent sight of the forest. Haggling over them has turned into a circular process, with neither side willing to cede ground. Meanwhile, Yemen slides further into famine and destitution. There will of course be those who say that for the US to abandon preconditions – let alone seek to negotiate without them - would be a capitulation: a reward for the Houthis bombing themselves into government. But from the IRA to the Taliban, there are many examples in recent history of armed groups doing just the same. The US negotiated power-sharing with both. If the US makes clear to the Houthis and the southerners in Yemen that a settlement containing a fair solution that embraces their concerns is on the table, there is a chance for peace. It must put power-sharing at its core. This may not be ideal, but the alternative is war. As I know from personal experience, when Yemenis start talking anything is possible. Persisting with demands that were not accepted in 2015 – or at any point over the subsequent six years – will only ensure the war will continue. Jamal Benomar is a former UN special envoy for Yemen and UN under secretary-general. He is chair of the International Center for Dialogue Initiatives