Documentary filmmaker Nick Broomfield (Whitney: Can I Be Me) takes a decidedly more personal tack in this latest film, tracing the life of his father, photographer Maurice Broomfield, in a touching and intimate portrait. Amid Broomfield Sr’s vivid photography of post-second world war Britain, his son charts his journey from factory worker to artist and pacifist, and examines the backdrop of a rapidly-changing Britain – namely the fall of industry in the north of England and the persistence of an ingrained class divide. Ammar Kalia Designers Anna Campbell-Jones and Zeena Shah go head to head in this new series, redecorating two holiday homes in the hopes of attracting the most likes from an online group of 100 prospective holidaymakers. The pair are in Aberdeenshire for this first task, taking on a castle and cottage. AK Our trusty Saturday night hosts are back for another 90 minutes of prizes and surprise guests. Tonight, the pair’s old co-host Cat Deeley is the victim of the undercover prank, while Romesh Ranganathan is in the Guest Announcer Booth, and there is a sporting Ant v Dec challenge. AK Before The Masked Singer’s snazzy costumes and ominous chants of “take it off!”, The Voice was the premier destination for a singing show gimmick. Despite looking conformist these days, it continues on, with Tom Jones, Olly Murs, Anne-Marie or Will.i.a.m and their acts looking to triumph tonight. Hannah J Davies Oscar winner, style icon and Hitchcock muse – before she became a real-life princess in Monaco, Grace Kelly left an indelible imprint on cinema. And she did it all in just six years. This doc paints a portrait of a hard-working actor who pushed back against the studio system. Graeme Virtue The chat stalwart dishes up another serving of classic clips from his interviews. There’s an impressive raft of names – Sir David Attenborough, Sheridan Smith, Kevin Hart and Julie Walters are just a few of the guests, as well as musical stars including Liam Gallagher and Ed Sheeran. Hannah Verdier The Love Witch, 12.40am, Film4 Anna Biller’s warm, satirical homage to 60s horror – Hammer and Hitchcock – stars Samantha Robinson as a glamorous witch who ruthlessly disposes of her admirers while seeking the ideal man. It’s gloriously shot and takes its world of sex and violence seriously, while forever teetering on the edge of ridiculousness. Simon Wardell Rugby Union: Scotland v Italy 1.45pm, BBC One. Fifth round of Six Nations fixtures from BT Murrayfield. Rugby Union: Ireland v England 4pm, ITV. Both teams’ concluding match of the Six Nations. Premier League Football: Brighton & Hove Albion v Newcastle United 7.30pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Live from AMEX Stadium.