Nicola Down Tue 23 Mar 2021 10.18 GMT
        
    
    

    


    
        
            Last modified on Tue 23 Mar 2021 10.33 GMT Most of us aren’t those extreme types we sometimes read about who get up at the crack of dawn and have already overachieved by 5am. Instead, the majority of us are in a snooze, scroll, snooze, sweary “eeek, is that the time?!” cycle, making mornings a frantic time, full of anxiety that can linger throughout the day. But, recently, an unexpected and welcome opportunity has arisen for some of us: with so many of us working from home, we now have 59 minutes that – on average – we previously spent commuting, to spend on rituals that support a calmer day. “By doing this, you’ll be cultivating what the Danish call ‘morgenfrisk’ – or morning freshness,” says Rachel Kelly, a mental health campaigner, and author of Singing in the Rain: 52 Practical Steps to Happiness. “We experience a flood of cortisol, the stress hormone, first thing, which gives us the boost we need to get up, but this can also make us anxious. Waking up with a calming routine that’s a pleasant process – whether that’s stretching and deep breathing, or simply giving yourself a moment to acknowledge your thoughts and feelings – can be hugely beneficial.” In other words, getting your morning routine nailed is well worth the time. Be realistic with your wake-up timeThough there isn’t any published research on the topic, many sleep scientists believe that the extra minutes of shuteye after you hit the snooze button don’t do any good – in fact, post-alarm snoozing can even derail your whole day. The reason? If you wake up and then doze, your brain is braced for the second alarm and it won’t let you dip back into the deep, restful stage of sleep, meaning you wake up feeling groggy. Instead, set your alarm for when you need to get up and you’ll score uninterrupted, restorative high-quality sleep. Once you’re up, throw those curtains back. Sunshine is an energising tonic, halting the production of melatonin, the hormone that makes you sleepy, plus it also sends signals to your body to start producing the happiness hormone, serotonin. Try essential oilsTo keep those positive vibes flowing, try aromatherapy, which is the practice of using essential oils for therapeutic benefit. It is believed that the scents work by stimulating smell receptors in the nose, which then send messages through the nervous system to the limbic system, which is the part of the brain that controls emotions. For morning zing, try sweet orange oil, which reduces stress levels, tames tension, and creates a higher level of calmness. Add a few drops to an aromatherapy diffuser or vaporiser, or add to your bath. Let go of negative thoughtsNegative niggles keep popping into your head? “Let them pass,” says Kelly. “If we don’t get in the habit of building a narrative around negative or fearful thoughts, they can pass very quickly.” Still struggling? Try recognising thoughts rather than arguing them. For instance: “This is anger. This is boredom. This is frustration.” By doing this, you’ll realise that your thoughts are just thoughts, not truths or something you need to necessarily act on. You could also try the “floating technique” for anxiety, where you simply stand back and watch your thoughts float past in your head, like leaves on a stream or passing clouds. Enjoy an ‘awe’ walkGo for an “awe walk” in the morning, which is where you combine physical activity with a sense of wonder and shift your attention outward instead of inward. According to the American Psychological Association, it will leave you feeling positive and upbeat. And it’s a doddle to do: simply head out early, ideally as dawn rises, and pay attention to the tiniest details in nature – the key is to set out with a fresh, mindful outlook, as if you’ve never seen a tree, bird, or sunrise before. Give yourself a massageA quick scalp massage, while taking a shower, can help you feel more zen. This is because massaging the scalp stimulates the nerves and blood vessels beneath the skin, while calming muscle tension around the head. It’s long been used in Ayurvedic rituals to encourage relaxation, with research finding that it can have a surprisingly positive impact on levels of cortisol, as well as blood pressure and heart rate. While the rubs we used to enjoy at the hairdressers feels like a distant memory, scalp massage is actually easy to do at home: simply make small, circular motions over your head with your fingertips and enjoy the calming effect it has on your body and mind. Get in the habit – any habit!According to research in the Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes journal, a consistent morning approach – doing the same things every AM – can set you up for a successful day. While habit-stacking – layering a new healthy habit on to an existing routine – could also benefit you further. Take brushing your teeth, for instance. While brushing is a great habit to have, brushing alone only reaches 60% of your tooth surfaces. This is where adding a new habit to your existing routine, such as using a TePe interdental brush comes in – cleaning hard-to-reach areas that your toothbrush can’t navigate. RelaxDon’t feel guilty about doing nothing. A global study on 18,000 people by Durham University found that our ability to properly rest and our levels of wellbeing are closely related. So indulge in a little guilt-free relaxation in the morning, whether that’s following the clouds as you’re waiting for the kettle to boil or watching your pets play instead of picking up your phone. Sound too simple to be effective? Research published in the journal Nature says the brain in its “do-nothing” resting state is not doing nothing at all, but regulating our emotions, processing experiences, consolidating memories, and keeping us firing on all cylinders. OK, so you may not be able to measure its benefits on a smartwatch, but you’ll be sure to feel its benefits. So, here’s to more good mornings … For more information, visit tepe.com/uk/sustainable-idb