The former England fast bowler Joey Benjamin has died at the age of 60 Benjamin was born in St Kitts but made his name in English cricket, signing for Warwickshire at the age of 27 after a spell in the minor counties before enjoying a succesful stint at Surrey between 1992 and 1999. At the age of 33 he played his only Test match, on home turf at the Oval against South Africa, in 1994, taking a first-innings haul of four for 42 in a match best remembered for Devon Malcolm’s match-winning nine-wicket salvo in the second. Benjamin was selected for the 1994-95 Ashes tour, but did not feature in the Test series after he and Malcolm caught chickenpox before the first Test at Brisbane. He was not selected for the Test side again, but picked up two one-day international caps against Australia and Zimbabwe. He finished his playing days with 387 first-class wickets at 29.94 and added 173 more in List A cricket. After retirement he coached at Reigate Grammar School. It has been reported that Benjamin died after suffering a heart attack. Warwickshire said on Tuesday: “It is with great sadness that today Warwickshire County Cricket Club has learned of the passing of former fast bowler Joey Benjamin. Benjamin enjoyed four seasons with the Bears where he made 25 first-class and 26 List A appearances, taking a combined 87 wickets across both formats. The thoughts of everyone at Warwickshire CCC are with Joey’s family and close friends at this difficult time.” Just heard some shocking news about the loss of Joey Benjamin. Joey was one of a kind, incredibly popular in the Surrey dressing room back in the day, so sad. RIP Benjy Benjamin’s longtime bowling partner at Surrey, Martin Bicknell, tweeted: “Just heard some shocking news about the loss of Joey Benjamin. Joey was one of a kind, incredibly popular in the Surrey dressing room back in the day, so sad. RIP Benjy”. The former England and Yorkshire fast bowler Darren Gough remembered his trip to Australia fondly, calling him “a great tourist” on Twitter.