Publishing, like politics and like comedy, is all about timing. The timing is not right for this book, which is a damning assessment of how the UK government of Boris Johnson mishandled almost every aspect of the coronavirus crisis, so that Britain suffered both the highest death toll in Europe and an economic slump more devastating than in any other G7 nation. The timing is off because of the one thing the government got right. At this moment, polls suggest a nation grateful to be vaccinated efficiently and at speed, with case numbers and deaths falling daily, schools open once more and the first sound of the key being turned on a lockdown that has seemed to last for ever. Spring is in the air and people are itching to break free. Those chunky Tory poll leads do not suggest a public eager to immerse itself in the horrors of the last year and work out what went wrong and who to blame. That time will come, however, and when it does, this book will serve well as the charge sheet. More than that, it reads like the first draft of the report that will one day be delivered by the inevitable public inquiry, even if it is balder and more scathing than those texts, written in mandarin English – indirect, coded, implied – usually dare to be. If you’ve ever wondered what an actual catalogue of disaster might look like, look no further. Failures of State is a Christmas-at-Argos sized catalogue of the government’s errors, page after page filled with its mistakes, misjudgments and even its possibly actionable crimes (it quotes lawyers who believe Johnson could be charged with “gross negligence manslaughter”). The authors are Jonathan Calvert and George Arbuthnott, investigative journalists and custodians of the storied Insight brand at the Sunday Times. There might be the odd Guardian reader who assumes the Murdoch press would never lay a glove on this Tory government. They should have been parted from that misconception when Calvert and Arbuthnott published last April what they tell us is the most read story in the online history of the Times or Sunday Times, an evisceration of Johnson’s pandemic response that was headlined “Coronavirus: 38 days when Britain sleepwalked into disaster”, revealing among other things that Johnson had failed to attend the first five Cobra meetings called to marshal the UK’s response. But Failures of State surely settles the matter. Some acts of negligence are, like that serial Cobra truancy, already well known. Still, there is a value in having laid out before you just how costly, for example, Johnson’s thrice-repeated delay in introducing lockdown proved to be. Three times it was screamingly obvious that the public would have to stay at home if the virus were to be reined in, and three times Johnson waited and waited: in March, in September and again this winter. The authors cite Imperial College modelling, which found that over the course of the combined 68 days that Johnson hesitated before imposing those three lockdowns, the number of infections that spread across Britain totalled 4.5m. “On each occasion, he had been advised to act immediately.” There is poor judgment wherever you look, leaving the reader by turns baffled and furious all over again. We read of the cabinet row in late March, when the first lockdown had already begun, over whether to close the country’s borders to flights from known virus hotspots. No, said the Foreign Office: that would complicate efforts to bring home Brits stranded abroad. All right, thinks the reader, then surely the government would close the borders once all returning Brits were safely back. But no. The flights kept coming. There are lesser-known horrors in the catalogue too. The authors are keen to explode the comforting narrative that the NHS coped with the pandemic even at its peak, and that everyone got the care they needed. They report that some hospitals were forced to ration treatment according to a set of guidelines that struck doctors and nurses as “Nazi-like”, denying intensive care to those who scored too high on three metrics: age, frailty and underlying conditions. Whole categories of people – the old, the weak, the disabled – were denied the critical care that might have saved their lives. Incredibly, the guidelines were so rigorously enforced that in one Midlands hospital, dozens of intensive care beds lay empty, kept free for younger, fitter patients, while those over-75 were left dying on regular wards, without even being offered non-invasive ventilation. It meant that of the patients who died at the height of the pandemic in April, just 10% had received any intensive care. The £185,000 a year head of Public Health England breezily admitted that his public health credentials could fit 'on a postage stamp' Word of all this hardly reached beyond the doctors, nurses and families who suffered through it. An omerta was imposed on hospitals to keep the reality on the wards hidden. The Unison trade union alleges that managers at Nottingham’s Queen’s medical centre, for example, locked away vital PPE “as punishment” after staff on a Covid ward raised concerns. Meanwhile, Matt Hancock was on TV saying everything was under control. It’s all here, the £185,000 a year head of Public Health England who breezily admitted that his public health credentials could fit “on a postage stamp”, along with the national stockpile of PPE supplies that had, thanks to austerity, been left to moulder in a Merseyside warehouse, much of it well past its use-by date. The shelves were full of respirators whose true expiry date was 2012, the labels simply replaced with new ones giving an end date of 2016, with another label placed on top of that one, claiming the devices were suitable for use in 2020. What explains this failure upon failure? The book describes “government by ADHD”, with ministers from Johnson down making crucial decisions “on the hoof” or “winging it” and hoping for the best. There’s an accusing finger pointed very directly at Rishi Sunak for ignoring advice and pushing to keep things open in the name of kickstarting the economy, even though it was obvious that what would hurt the economy most would be lockdowns that had to run long because they came too late. (By contrast, Michael Gove is regularly presented as the voice of sober realism in the face of the pandemic, a gloss which has one wondering if the loquacious minister might perhaps have been a generous source to two journalists working for his former employer at Times Newspapers.) Above all, it describes a government that only had eyes for Brexit, that had diverted whatever contingency planning capacity it had to a no-deal scenario rather than to a looming pandemic. The authors have little patience for Johnson’s defence that any failings are only visible now with the benefit of what the PM likes to call the “retrospectoscope”. By way of rebuttal, they reproduce the warnings scientists were giving back in January 2020, spelling out the dangers and urging swift action. Two are quoted, accusing Downing Street of twisting their words to suggest that it was they, the experts, who had underestimated the severity of the threat, a move Richard Horton, editor of the Lancet, calls a “Kremlinesque” attempt at “government disinformation”. As Horton puts it: “They really are scared that the verdict of history is going to condemn them for contributing to the deaths of tens of thousands of British citizens … They are desperately trying to rewrite the timeline of what happened. And we must not let them do that.” Calvert and Arbuthnott have exposed the failings of Johnson, his ministers, advisers and many others. What, perhaps, is missing – besides a fuller look at the scandal of test and trace, with its indefensible £37bn price tag – is the larger accusation hinted at in the title: the failures of the British state that made this disaster likely, regardless of who was in charge. Is there a more deep-rooted arrogance and complacency, a lack of care, that went beyond, and predated, Johnson and Dominic Cummings? Maybe that question will have to wait. For now, this is the book to throw at those who were meant to protect the British public and failed in their duty. This vaccine spring may not be the moment for that reckoning. But it will come, one day. • Failures of State: The Inside Story of Britain’s Battle with Coronavirus is published by Mudlark (£20). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.