Such a strong look for the government’s police, crime, sentencing and courts bill to allow for longer sentences for attacking statues than are handed down for attacking women. What if the victim of crime is one of those living statues who busk in public spaces – a Queen Victoria, say, or a Statue of Liberty? Do you prosecute the defendant as though he’s merely harmed a woman, or do you go for the fullest force of law and treat him as if he has defaced an inanimate object? Doesn’t have to be a female living statue, of course. There’s sometimes a living statue of Winston Churchill outside Covent Garden tube station. If a load of drunks set upon him – and living statues are constantly set upon, by their own accounts – do you close the investigation within about six hours owing to lack of resources? Or do you act as though someone has scrawled “is a racist” on a pedestal beneath 12 foot of insensate bronze, and push for 10 years in jail for a crime so supposedly emotive the perpetrator will be begging to be transferred to solitary after he’s endured three days of HMP Frankland’s welcoming party? Either way, given how very far to go we have on dealing with violence against women and girls, it seems insulting in the extreme that the government is spaffing so much as three seconds of legislative time on statues. When MP Jess Phillips stood up in parliament on International Women’s Day last week and named all the women who have been killed in Britain in the past year where a man has been charged or convicted, it took her over four minutes. There were 118 women, and there will have been more since. In the same time frame, there has been precisely one – ONE – statue “killed”, which feels incredible given the absolute bedwetting about it all for months now. Four people in Bristol have already appeared in court charged with causing criminal damage to the long-contentious monument to slaver Edward Colston (1636-1721), and will face trial in December. But to repeat: one statue. Face it, if that’s the casualty count in the so-called “woke war on statues”, all we’ve learned is that snowflakes are utterly useless at war. (Except in Russia, admittedly. As one of the tsars once remarked: “January and February are my best generals.”) Anyway, those who appear to care more about statues than women are surely not the sort of company the government ought to keep. This is the domain of someone like Tommy Robinson, who along with the rest of the far right sees “defending statues” as his new hot-button issue, having exhausted the moneyspinning possibilities of pretending to give a shit about women and girls. I say pretending, because when Tommy isn’t trying to collapse grooming gang rape trials – which would clearly force victims through the anguish of a second trial and having to testify twice – he’s got form for wholly inappropriate contact with them. “You’re pretty fit for a Muslim,” ran his opening gambit in one Twitter exchange a few years ago. “I’m 15,” replied the girl, “and you got the cheek to call Muslims paedos.” Robinson’s reply: “Hows it feel to be nearly twice the age Aisha was when your prophet raped her …. Now stop flirting with me.” Robinson has now shifted this moral gaze to statues, with his clarion calls on the subject in recent months pulling in the donations, and encouraging troops of volunteers to “defend” statues they regard as under threat. Though like all superfans of Middlemarch, I very much enjoyed the comic spectacle of five would-be hardnuts lined up in a defensive cluster around the statue of George Eliot in Nuneaton. Naturally, it’s not just Tommy Robinson stoking this culture war. The UK is unfortunately rich in the sort of narcissistic idiots who should serve as cautionary tales to the government to steer well clear of turning this into a bigger deal than they’ve already made it. Take Laurence Fox – please – whose big idea for his campaign to be London mayor is to erect “even MORE statues”. The former actor is pledging that not a single statue would ever be pulled down on his watch, because “parents should be able to educate their children about those who came before, both good and bad”. If that’s the case, where was Laurence in 2012, when a statue of Jimmy Savile was being removed from Glasgow’s Scotstoun leisure centre? Sorry, I’ve just seen he was playing the future George VI in some mad historical drama directed by Madonna. But keeping that question rhetorical: where was Laurence when the Savile statue was removed from the leisure centre? Hang on: I can see he also banged out a few episodes of Lewis that year too. But returning to the rhetorical: where was Lozza when Savile was toppled in a Glasgow leisure centre? By rights he should have been fighting “woke” Glaswegians in the foyer of Scotstoun, pointing out that Savile had been deeply woven into the fabric of a period of national life, and consequently covered by Laurence’s decree that “parents should be able to educate their children about those who came before, both good and bad”. As he keeps explaining, we must “celebrate our shared national history”. Doesn’t matter if that’s slaving or paedoing – you HAVE to celebrate ALL history. This level of dazzling absurdity is obvious to anyone who contemplates these issues for two minutes or more. It may be cheap for now, needlessly fanning the flames of culture wars instead of coming up with actual ideas to make people’s lives better. But wow, do you pay the further you get down the line, where the government’s preference for posturing over policy will turn out to have been the real insult to “British values”. Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnist