New York’s attorney general, Letitia James, on Monday appointed a former federal prosecutor and an employment lawyer to investigate allegations that the state governor, Andrew Cuomo, sexually harassed female aides. Joon Kim, who was the acting US attorney in Manhattan during different times in 2017 and 2018, will join the employment lawyer, Anne Clark, in conducting the investigation, the attorney general’s office said. James said the pair were “independent, legal experts who have decades of experience conducting investigations and fighting to uphold the rule of law”. “There is no question that they both have the knowledge and background necessary to lead this investigation and provide New Yorkers with the answers they deserve,” she said in a statement. The appointments came as New York lawmakers were privately debating whether to join calls for Cuomo to resign from office, or urge patience while the investigation is ongoing. A group of 21 women in the state assembly released a statement on Monday asking that James be given time to complete her assessment. Those lawmakers, who include the No 2 Democrat in the state assembly, the majority leader, Crystal People-Stokes, began working on the statement on Sunday night after the state senate’s top leader, Andrea Stewart-Cousins, called on Cuomo to resign. “We continue to support our attorney general, the first woman, and the first African American woman to be elected to this position, as she launches this investigation,” it said. “We request that she be allowed the appropriate time to complete her investigation rather than undermine her role and responsibility as the chief law enforcement officer of the state of New York.” Cuomo, appeared with Black clergy members on Monday at a vaccination site in New York City. The event was closed to reporters, but Cuomo said on Sunday he had no intention of resigning and believes he can continue to govern. Several women, including three former members of Cuomo’s staff, have accused him of making inappropriate comments about their appearance, asking questions about their sex life and, in some cases, giving them uncomfortable hugs or unwanted kisses. The governor has denied touching anyone inappropriately, and said some of the allegations are false. But he has acknowledged, and apologized for, engaging in “banter” in the office that some women interpreted as flirting. Cuomo has said he didn’t realize at the time that his actions were harmful. James, a Democrat, has said she will hire an outside law firm to investigate Cuomo’s workplace conduct. Separately, Cuomo is under fire for withholding data from the public and from state lawmakers on Covid-19 deaths among nursing home patients. Critics say they suspect the statistics were withheld to protect the Democrat’s image – a charge the governor has denied. The assembly speaker, Carl Heastie, whose support would be vital for any effort to impeach Cuomo, stopped short of asking him to resign on Sunday, but said: “I think it is time for the governor to seriously consider whether he can effectively meet the needs of the people of New York.”