A court in Saudi Arabia has denied an appeal by one of the kingdom’s most prominent political activists that would have allowed her to travel freely, her supporters said, weeks after her release from prison. Relatives of Loujain al-Hathloul, whose 1,001-day detention drew fierce international criticism of the kingdom’s human rights record, had hoped that a five-year ban on travelling outside Saudi Arabia that the court imposed as a condition of her release on 10 February would be lifted. She also faces three years of probation, meaning she cannot return to activism or speak her mind without risking re-arrest, her family said. Hathloul has declined interviews with the press and largely stayed silent on social media for that reason. Walking to court on Wednesday morning she told reporters that she hoped the court would amend her sentence – her first public comments since her 2018 arrest. Loujain on her way to court today ❤️ https://t.co/o1KvIc0SQh However, the specialised criminal court in Riyadh, which handles terrorism and national security charges, confirmed Hathloul’s original sentence – a rubber-stamp decision on the publicised and politicised case. “The international community should be outraged at this judgment,” her sister Lina al-Hathloul said in a statement. “The confirmation of the sentence of my sister Loujain is yet another confirmation of the abuse of power of the Saudi authorities.” The travel ban underlines the government’s efforts to manage dissent in the kingdom through protracted restrictions on freed political prisoners. Two Saudi-Americans also released last month similarly face travel bans and asset freezes pending trial on what rights groups describe as unsubstantiated terrorism charges. Hathloul, 31, gained prominence as a champion of women’s right to drive before the kingdom lifted its ban in mid-2018. She was sentenced last December to almost six years in prison under vague cybercrime and counter-terrorism laws. Rights activists described the charges as retribution for her activism. Her high-profile release last month came as the kingdom’s rulers, who cultivated close ties to the former US president Donald Trump, braced for a strained relationship with the new president, Joe Biden. Since taking office, Biden has announced the end of US support for the Saudi-led military coalition fighting in Yemen, paused some arms sales to the kingdom and released an intelligence report on the killing of journalist Jamal Khashoggi which concluded that the Saudi crown prince, Mohammed bin Salman, probably approved the murder. Biden welcomed Hathloul’s release as “the right thing to do”. Now, her family is trying to keep her case in the spotlight, praising the international pressure that secured her release while warning that she and other women’s rights activists are not free. “As long as she cannot campaign for women’s rights, as long as she cannot be an activist again, things won’t change honestly,” Hathloul’s sister said after her release.