“How on earth do these things work?” is a reasonable question when faced with a cryptic clue. The answer goes “Well, half of it is a definition of the answer, and the other half is a little recipe for the letters in the answer,” because that’s how the things are always structured. Except, of course, when they’re not. Since the earliest days, setters have also deployed another trick: describing the answer in a way that is very easy to misread. The cryptic definition is pretty much a joke, and many of the most-quoted clues work in this way. Here are a couple, which have been attributed to Adrian Bell, the first Times setter. This cylinder is jammed (5,4) Die of cold (3,4) “Die” and “jammed” are not doing what they appear, as the answers are SWISS ROLL and ICE CUBE. Unlike some types of clue from the early days (such as “fill in the missing word from the Horatian ode”), the cryptic definition is going strong. In the Guardian, I expect to find one or two on a Monday, for many years from Rufus … 16ac Sporting event one’s bound to compete in (5-6,4) 3d Even when frayed, it should be kept (6) 10ac They lead the way in the present transport system (8) … that’s THREE-LEGGED RACE, TEMPER and REINDEER, and today from setters like Vulcan. Here’s one from Vulcan’s latest: 2d Paperwork finished without tears (7) “Tears” rhymes with “bears”, not “fears”, and it’s ORIGAMI. But, the solver may reasonably worry: I know these are cryptic definitions because you’ve just told me that’s what we’re talking about. In a genuine puzzle environment, might I not get stuck? I won’t have an anagram or anything to confirm the answer. Worry not! The crossing letters are a big help – also, sometimes you do get something else to confirm the answer. We’ve looked at double-definition clues; sometimes, the setter will bundle up one normal and one cryptic definition. Rufus again: 20ac Be careful! The time is not right (5,3) Two ways in to WATCH OUT. Equally, a setter might offer a cryptic definition accompanied by the usual synonyms and abbreviations that make up most cryptic clues. This one’s from Paul: 24ac American behind bars, enclosure with little room (4,4)[ wordplay: synonym for ‘enclosure’ next to (‘with’) synonym for ‘little room’, euphemistically ][ CAGE next to JOHN ][ definition: American behind bars ] What next? Beginners, any questions? The impression is sometimes given that all cryptic clues are cryptic definitions, but they’re more of an occasional treat. That said, American puzzles, which don’t use wordplay at all and which oblige every letter to be part of an across and a down clue, keep things interesting with a much higher proportion of cryptic definitions: there are a ton of examples in the series of US-style puzzles we’re developing here. The examples of double definitions in our for beginners series might be a good place to go next; seasoned solvers, do you have any favourites to share? Finally, these explainers are supposed to be timeless, but for those who have come here in 2021, we are sharing tips in a playlist called Healing Music Recorded in 2020-21 to Accompany a Solve or Even Listen to. The latest was recorded last week by Isata Kanneh-Mason. The Shipping Forecast Puzzle Book by Alan Connor, which is partly but not predominantly cryptic, can be ordered from the Guardian Bookshop. Here is a collection of all our explainers, interviews and other helpful bits and bobs.