Spoiler alert: this blog is for those watching series six of Line of Duty (it also contains spoilers from earlier series). Don’t read on unless you have watched the second episode of the new series. Hello everyone – I am determined to get through this week without errors or mixing up episodes so fingers crossed because things are really heating up. We had a murder, an attempted murder, the probable setting up and arrest of Ian Buckells, a surprise sleepover, random drug testing at AC-12, a broken wrist, the discovery of the freezer Jackie Laverty was kept in and the OCG link between her murder and Gail Vella’s, Steve and Kate’s realisation that Ryan was the kid who attempted to cut Steve’s fingers off in series one and confirmation that Jo Davidson can stay as cool as a cucumber and clearly has links with the OCG. Hang on to your seatbelts and let’s begin. This week was something of a mixed bag for AC-12. Kate’s delivery of Ian Buckells led to a reconciliation with Ted – I loved the way that their relationship progressed from respectful nods to full-blown “welcome back” beam – which was somewhat undermined by the fact they have almost certainly got the wrong man, a probability that will undoubtedly blow up in their faces and lead to serious trouble for Ted, already on a last-chance written warning. Still, at least they found the freezer Jackie Laverty was kept in and were able to make the connection between her death, the OCG and Gail’s murder. It was also great to see Steve and Kate working together rather than sniping at each other – I cheered when they worked out who Ryan was and how he got through the police vetting process. Unfortunately that was probably the highlight of an unfortunate time for Steve. First, Steph told Ted about the surprise visit and the painkiller issue, which led to a round of drug testing. Ted excused Steve from the first test, giving him the chance to get clean, only for him to relapse just before his second. Oh Steve, I see a period in rehab coming (I hope it’s that, rather than a codeine overdose). He also went round to Steph’s house again where, surprisingly, she propositioned him, proving that her relationship with Ted is a complex mix of guilt on both sides: hers stemming from accepting Ted’s money, his from the deaths of John and John’s mother. Steve and Steph were two lonely people looking for a connection but, instead of having sex, they ended up confessing why they couldn’t: Steve has trapped nerves in his back because he has apparently never properly recovered after being thrown down several flights of stairs. Steph, meanwhile, is still too in love with her dead husband to sleep with another man. It was a sweet, rather touching moment and one that Steve completely undermined by searching for – and finding – the money Ted had given Steph. This was quite a week for the bad guys. We learned that Davidson is pretty much unflappable under pressure and takes a malicious pleasure in quoting AC-12’s regulations back at them (although she did get mildly flustered when she learned that they were expanding the search at Farida’s home). She is also very adept at switching emotions, from needling Steve to providing a sympathetic ear to Kate (while leading her down the garden path of a possibly wrongful arrest) and presenting a “model professional” face to Ted at the episode’s end. Add to this what appears to be a clear OCG connection and you have a very slippery opponent – although, surely, AC-12 are going to notice soon that everyone who stands in her way ends up arrested and interrogated? Elsewhere, it was all systems go on the murder and mayhem front as dodgy witness Deborah Devereux (Kerri McLean) claimed Terry was the man arguing with Alastair Oldroyd, the Chis, in the Red Lion pub. This in turn led to Terry being pulled in for a very distressing interview after which Ryan drove the car transporting him home into a reservoir before strangling the driver, Lisa Patel (Tara Divina), and attempting to drown Terry, an attempt only foiled because they had been followed by a suspicious Kate. The big question here is who ordered him to do it? Davidson, Buckells, the OCG, or a combination of all three? Because the jury is still out on Buckells and the water is just muddy enough to suggest that he could be working with Davidson (the possible connection with Deborah Devereux being the main piece of evidence, but also the conversation in episode one between Buckells and Davidson about needing to talk about what to do). And yet, it would also be easy enough for Davidson to see her boss as a useful fall guy and set him up. Hopefully we’ll get to see his interrogation next week and that may clear things up. We had this series’ hand injury, with the brutal breaking of Farida’s wrist in prison and, as an added bonus, a reference to Ryan trying to cut off Steve’s fingers in series one. I thoroughly enjoyed Ted’s continued needling of Sindwhani (Ace Bhatta) and his insistence that his officers “follow the letter of the law”, which roughly translates into you can stick your written warning where the sun don’t shine. Also enjoyable: Davidson’s crack about Buckells and the Masons, his perpetual poncing around with the golf club, Kate’s refusal to clap Ryan’s commendation and Davidson correctly calling Buckells a twat. Kate was also correct that it was ridiculous to take photos and put in for commendations before a full investigation into the crash had been completed. That said, Kate has clearly let Davidson’s effusive praise (“Well done, Kate, I needed someone on my team that I could trust completely … who better than an anti-corruption agent?”) go to her head, which in turn led her to be convinced of Buckells’ guilt … Thank goodness then for Chloe, a centre of calm competence in the maelstrom of AC-12. In interior design news, I was very taken with Steph’s bed linen. Ryan did not do well in his interview with Kate, coming across as shifty, evasive and a liar. “AC-12 must get a pound every time someone says OCG,” is a great line and would have been quote of the week were it not for a cracker from Ted. “The name’s Hastings ma’am, I’m the epitome of an old battle” is a fabulous line and wonderfully delivered by Adrian Dunbar. Tempting as it is to give this to the weaselly Davidson, Ryan did murder one person, attempt to murder another and then weasel his weaselly way into a commendation, which makes him this week’s very deserving winner. So what do you think? Has Kate let flattery get the better of her? Will Steve end up in rehab? Will Ted be forced to quit if it turns out that Davidson is guilty and they have arrested the wrong man? And, most importantly, just how weaselly are Ryan Pilkington and Jo Davidson? As ever all speculation and no spoilers welcome below …