We open on a new episode of Oops, You Did It Again, a talk show in which Britney Spears (Chloe Fineman) judges whether social pariahs are “Innocent or Not That Innocent”. Her first guest is rapper Lil Nas X (Chris Redd), under attack from “the rare combo of the Catholic Church and Nike” for his “Satan Shoes” and video wherein he gives the devil a lap dance. To balance things out, Britney brings on God so the rapper can twerk on his lap. Cue conservative faux outrage on Sunday. He is followed by canceled Looney Toons star Pepe LePew (Kate McKinnon), cut from the Space Jam sequel for “promoting a culture of assault”. Given that the show recognizes the dumbness of the Lil Nas X controversy, you’d think they’d send up the furor over a cartoon skunk. Instead, they lay into the supposedly problematic nature of the character. Spears’s third and final guest is Florida congressman Matt Gaetz (Pete Davidson), revealed to be under investigation over allegations of sex trafficking. The young Republican star is nervous about his future under such allegations – which the real Gaetz denies – even as he admits “weirdly, in my district, they might help”. Daniel Kaluuya’s Monologue! pic.twitter.com/YioaXz4Aon It is utterly baffling that the show would trot out Davidson in a bad wig to do a half-baked impression when Colin Jost – who looks like the congressman and has the same air of frat-boy smarminess – is right there. Leave it to SNL to brick the easiest lay-up in years. Our host is the Oscar-nominated actor Daniel Kaluuya, who, despite his accent, assures the audience he is indeed black, saying “Basically, I’m what the royal family was afraid the baby would look like.” After explaining the difference between British racism and American racism (the former is “so bad that white people left”) and recounting the technical difficulties that beset his Golden Globes victory speech, he tells a heartfelt story about how his first time on stage was for a play he wrote at the age of nine, based on Kenan Thompson’s Nickelodeon show, Kenan & Kel. Will You Take It? is a game show wherein Kaluuya’s doctor host tries to convince his family to take the Covid-19 vaccine by offering $5,000. Despite all of them being high-risk and in need of money, they refuse. His aunt Shana refuses because Facebook told her Christians can’t take the vaccine; his cousin Tasha blames America’s history of experimenting on black communities. To his cousin, even the exasperated host concedes: “OK, you’re not wrong.” A popular YouTube duo keep going viral for their pranks – including planting mouse bones in cereal – only to have to fame backfire when their history gets dredged up. In a series of increasingly ridiculous apology videos, they concede “that some of [their] past videos could be considered problematic and/or crimes”. It’s a solid send-up of a trend, including the saga of the shrimp tail guy, but it can’t match the real thing for absurdity or irony. Next, McKinnon plays a suburban mother who after her suggestion of Rummikub is vetoed for post-dinner game night, takes revenge through passive-aggressive noises and binge-drinking Josh wine – “the official wine of Rummikub”. This is followed by another suburban post-dinner sketch in which three couples are joined by their college-age sons. One couple, from Uganda, are horrified to learn their son changed his major from medicine to creative writing. When a white parent says the world needs more poets, Kaluuya’s outraged patriarch retorts: “Yes, if there’s anything we learned from the pandemic it’s that the world needs more poets!” There’s a real specificity to the humor, which one has to assume comes out of Kaluuya’s experience. St Vincent is the musical guest, performing the glammy Pay Your Way in Pain. Weekend Update then kicks off with Jost laying into Gaetz, who he admits “looks like a caricature artist’s drawing of me” – making Davidson’s casting even more egregious. He points out the hypocrisy of rightwingers: “A sitting congressman is being accused of child trafficking, and the QAnon people are suddenly like, ‘Eh, I need more evidence.’” Britney's final guest tonight was Florida Congressman Matt Gaetz. pic.twitter.com/Bde0PgSZuH The first guests are Smokey Farms owners Vaneta and Wylene Starkie (McKinnon and Aidy Bryant), who promise their “grade-A Easter meats” are sourced from animals that deserved to be killed: a lamb who attended a plantation wedding, a hen who “contributed to a toxic work environment”, a veal who “yanks off on the subway”. They’re followed by the smarmy Guy Who Just Bought a Boat (Alex Moffat), on hand to discuss post-pandemic dating (“Goodbye Facetime – hello sit-on-my-face time!”), and a very mixed-age couple, Heidi Gardner and Mikey Day. After a pointless sketch about frat boys planning a Tahoe trip with their mothers, Kaluuya plays a dog owner who offends other owners with silly impression of their mutts. This leads to a standoff with Andrew Dismukes over the affections of Ego Nwodim, only for her to skip out on both of them. There’s a decent punchline but it’s dragged down by awkward staging. The use of real dogs doesn’t help. St Vincent returns for The Melting of the Sun, before the final sketch finds yet another group of suburban friends gathering for wine. Things take a strange turn when the host’s half-brother (and “full Facebook friend”) and his soon-to-be ex-wife, Joleen (“like the whore from the song”), perform some free-form jazz. From the way Cecily Strong is dressed, this would appear to be an elaborate send-up of a video from 2011 in which Kim Cattrall shows off her scat skills. SNL with its finger on the pulse, as always. Kaluuya was responsible for a few bright spots but most of the episode left a lot to be desired. The sheer laziness on display – the refusal to take full advantage of the cast, overreliance on a handful of tired set-ups – underlines one of the biggest problems with SNL right now.