Interviews by Rosie Mullender Thu 14 Jan 2021 16.16 GMT


Last modified on Thu 14 Jan 2021 16.19 GMT When the UK was first plunged into lockdown in March 2020, many who weren’t key workers or overnight home school teachers were left with an unprecedented amount of free time on their hands – and just when they really needed the distractions of everyday life the most. With restrictions in place once more, we meet people across the four nations of the UK who have managed to find the positives of life being on pause. ‘I’ve been working on helping others’Aqeel Ahmed, 22, is a civil servant from Glasgow I work in social policy for the Scottish government, and during lockdown, I started a postgrad course in community learning at the University of Dundee. It focuses on how we ensure there’s parity of access to services and learning, and opportunities to gain new skills, and both the course and lockdown have made me more aware of what goes on in the community. Among other things, I’ve been helping to tidy neglected community spaces, and working with a local organisation called the Village Storytelling Centre to help them set up a telephone befriending service that will connect with isolated and older people. I’ve also been working with a charity I helped to start called What About Me?, which helps tackle bullying within schools across Scotland. With young people learning at home, there’s a lot of cyberbullying going on that schools can’t tackle, so I’ve set up a Youth Advisory Group that’s looking at supporting people in lockdown. On a personal level, I’ve connected with volunteers and seen more of my friends, albeit virtually. There’s a lot more openness to virtual meetings now, which means we can meet up more regularly. Because one of the only things we’ve been allowed to do is exercise outdoors, I’ve also taken up walking every day. I think for me, walking is going to be the personal legacy that comes out of lockdown – it’s a great chance to get away from a screen. My heart goes out to those finding lockdown incredibly difficult, but better times are ahead. My advice would be to cherish the good things, stick to a routine, keep in touch with people, and reach out if you need help. We’ll get there. ‘I built a memorial garden for my dad’Sharon Hughes, 51, is an on-set tutor from Penymynydd, Flintshire Renovating the garden over lockdown came about by accident. My business, Tutors on Location, teaches child actors while they’re working in TV and film, so when filming stopped due to Covid-19, work stopped too. Although I used the time to work out how to teach remotely via Zoom, I still had some free time. My husband, Pete, and I were sitting in the garden reading when we started looking around, thinking about what needed doing. We didn’t have a grand plan – it just started with painting the fence. But then I began working on one little section that evolved into a memorial to my dad. Dad died suddenly in 2015, when he and mum were on holiday, and we went into autopilot organising everything. I put my feelings in a box and pushed it to one side, which meant five years on, his death was still having a huge impact on my life. He was a very proud Welshman, so I found a local stonemason who creates signs out of Welsh slate. He made a marker with a heart carved through it, inscribed with “Dad” and I added it to the garden along with lights and hanging CDs – when the sun hits them it sends rainbows twinkling across his patch, which looks beautiful. My son Kristian got involved, too. Dad was always doing things like dismantling and restoring old tractors, and Kristian loved joining in. So when he decided the garden paving looked a mess, he took it all up, cleaned the slabs, hired a cement mixer and relaid it. That’s definitely Dad’s influence. This lockdown, I’m going to create some animated videos for my business that will help children learn maths. Without lockdown, I wouldn’t have had time to get to grips with the software, but surprisingly, I’ve found I quite enjoy being creative. Finding something, however small, to focus on is the best way to get through this. ‘I took up a host of new hobbies’Janet Mullender, 67, is a retired nurse from Billericay, Essex When my husband John and I got married 46 years ago, we were living with my mum. Then we had our two children, and were both working – as a nurse I worked weekends, nights and most Christmases – so we’ve never had any time just for us. It was only when the first lockdown hit that John finally retired, at 68. Before, I’d be on my own all week, so I’d meet friends, visit museums, and volunteer in a charity shop. But when everything stopped, I had John at home with me instead – and it has been a revelation. We’ve worked on projects together, from sorting out the garden to doing a daily weights workout, and have our own hobbies too. When we cleared out the loft, we found lots of old china, so I tried my hand at making mosaics. I didn’t care how they turned out, but I’ve made a birdhouse and edged the garden paths, and really enjoyed it. I converted the spare room into a craft room, buying secondhand children’s books and turning them into cards and wrapping paper. I’ve also been writing my personal history, including details of my 30-year nursing career, for the family archive. Meanwhile, John has taken up sewing and makes face masks for the family. He’s also working on building a cigar-box guitar, learning to cook, and adding to his collection of musical instruments. As well as trying new things, exercising is an important part of getting through lockdown. After our morning workout, we go for a half-hour walk, and although we don’t always feel like doing it, we feel much better afterwards – I’ve even lost half a stone. ‘I’ve had time to enjoy my first year of married life’Eileen Donaghey, 32, is an afternoon tea expert from Belfast I specialise in hosting luxury afternoon tea events and before lockdown, I’d travel from Belfast to London each week, where you’d find me on Park Lane with a cup of tea in hand, entertaining tourists. The business was really starting to take off in 2020, but then lockdown happened. I noticed afternoon tea deliveries were proving popular, and thought it would be useful to write a guide on how to prepare one at home, so I wrote an ebook, A Beginner’s Guide to Afternoon Tea at Home: Tips and Tricks to Teach You How to be the Host With the Most. I held a virtual book launch in December, and people attended from all over the world – people outside the UK are fascinated by all things afternoon tea. My husband, Peter, helped me test out my new sandwich recipes, too. Peter and I were very lucky to have gotten married in November 2019, because otherwise we might not have had the wedding we wanted. We saw being able to spend more time together during our first year of marriage as a blessing. It was lovely to be able to take lots of walks and go hiking around Belfast. Before Covid-19, I travelled a lot for work. I’d be away during the week and come back on a Thursday evening, so lockdown was a change of pace. Obviously it’s disheartening that we’re in another lockdown, but I tell myself there are brighter days ahead. I recommend making a list of things you’ve always wanted to do but never had the time for, and seeing which of them you can do at home. I never thought I’d write a book, but I surprised myself – I’m sure lots of other people have hidden talents they can uncover this time around, too. There are things we can all do to look after our mental wellbeing at this time. Every Mind Matters can get you started with a free NHS online plan, showing you simple steps to help manage anxiety, sleep better, and boost your mood. For your mental health action plan, search Every Mind Matters today. For NHS-approved free tools and support for getting active or losing weight visit: nhs.uk/better-health For guidance on dealing with bullying and cyberbullying, go to: youngminds.org.uk/find-help/feelings-and-symptoms/bullying For more information, visit:England: gov.uk; Scotland: gov.scot; Wales: gov.wales; Northern Ireland: nidirect.gov.uk This advertiser content was paid for by the UK government. All together (Stay at home) is a government-backed initiative tasked with informing the UK about the Covid-19 pandemic. For more information, visit gov.uk/coronavirus