Bayern Munich were dumped out of the German Cup by second-tier Holstein Kiel, who prevailed 6-5 on penalties after a 2-2 draw in extra time. In the shootout, both sides converted all five spot-kicks before Bayern’s Marc Roca had his sudden-death effort saved. Fin Bartels slotted in the winning penalty to eliminate the holders at the second-round stage, their earliest exit since 2000. The visitors went ahead through Serge Gnabry in the 14th minute and Thomas Müller should have doubled the lead when he fired over the bar from close range. Bayern were punished on the break in the 37th minute as defensive issues resurfaced, Bartels racing past Niklas Süle to equalise. Hansi Flick made five changes to the team that squandered a two-goal lead to lose 3-2 at Mönchengladbach in the Bundesliga on Friday, but his team continued to look vulnerable at the back even after Leroy Sané’s fine free-kick restored their lead. Jamal Musiala hit the woodwork for Bayern before Hauke Wahl’s last-gasp header sent the game into extra time. Kiel, who are currently third in the second division, held off their opponents and then kept their cool in the shootout to earn a last-16 tie against fellow 2. Bundesliga side Darmstadt. “We believed throughout that we could spring a big surprise here tonight,” Bartels said. “Overall I think it capped a very good performance from us and we deserved it.” “We lost to the underdogs and they did everything they could,” Müller said. “We had chances in the first half, but we made mistakes and Kiel punished us. They were very efficient but we should have won the game. We are out and it is bitter.” In France, Neymar’s late penalty sealed a 2-1 win for PSG against Marseille in the French Super Cup, earning Mauricio Pochettino his first trophy as a manager after less than two weeks in the job. The Brazil forward, who had been out of action for a month with an ankle injury, came off the bench in Lens to score from the penalty spot in the 85th minute to double PSG’s lead after Mauro Icardi’s first-half opener. Icardi put PSG ahead six minutes before the break, tapping in after his header was parried back into his path by Steve Mandanda. Neymar replaced Ángel Di María after 65 minutes and stepped up to score after Icardi was brought down by Yohann Pelé. Dimitri Payet pulled one back for Marseille in the 89th minute but it was not enough to deny PSG the trophy in a game delayed by the Covid-19 pandemic. “The biggest honour PSG could [give] us is the way they celebrated as if they had won the Champions’ League,” said Marseille’s manager, André Villas-Boas. Barcelona booked their place in the Spanish Super Cup final after overcoming Real Sociedad 3-2 in a penalty shootout following a 1-1 draw after extra time. In the first semi-final of the tournament, Frenkie de Jong headed Barça in front five minutes before half-time, but conceded a penalty for handball which la Real’s Mikel Oyarzabal converted. In the shootout, Oyarzabal, Willian José and Jon Bautista all missed but De Jong and Antoine Griezmann failed to score for Barcelona. That left Riqui Puig to take the decisive fifth penalty in Cordóba, and the 21-year-old scored to set up a final against either Real Madrid or Athletic Bilbao. Originally set to take place in Saudi Arabia, the tournament is now being held in Andalucía due to travel restrictions. In the Coppa Italia, Internazionale needed an extra-time winner from substitute Romelu Lukaku to see off Fiorentina and set up a Milan derby in the quarter-finals. Arturo Vidal’s penalty had put Inter ahead before Christian Kouamé’s thumping equaliser. Lukaku headed home the decisive goal with a minute left to play at San Siro. Elsewhere, a much-changed Juventus edged past Genoa 3-2, with 21-year-old Hamza Rafia scoring the winner in extra time. Dejan Kulusevski and the returning Álvaro Morata put Juve in command, but goals from Lennart Czyborra and Filippo Melegoni got struggling Genoa level before Rafia drilled home on his debut. Holders Napoli edged another thriller, beating Empoli 3-2 at the Stadio Diego Armando Maradona. Nedim Bajrami scored two equalisers for the Serie B leaders, but they had no answer to Andrea Petagna’s winner in the 77th minute.