There’s no greater hell than being an asshole with morals. My tendency to over-analyse makes me slow to act; I question whether I’m doing the right thing constantly. I inherited my father’s welcoming nature – he loves to tell jokes and stories; reasonableness is his default position. But I also got my mother’s violent rage. It’s rare that I lose my temper, but when I do I become every bit the devil of her. I gambled with Georgia’s drug dealers in the mid-90s – high people are generally good to bet against. One night I was accused of stacking the deck, a gun was held to my head and a man demanded I return his money. I refused out of pride, despite the fact I’d been cheating. It’s true what they say: when death feels imminent your life flashes before you. My only regret was having not seen England. I searched for Rada’s address the following day. Drowning my sorrows led me to standup comedy. It was 1999 and I’d been shown the door at drama school, then fired from a touring pantomime. Drinking away my last £20 at a bar, I started talking shit, and suddenly everyone was laughing. Someone pointed to a poster for a comedy night. I turned up for a 10-minute slot without a single joke. My riffs got the room on side and I haven’t stopped since. I hated my mother when I came to London, but Lord knows I miss that old girl today. She hit all her children, but we feared the violence of her words more than the beatings. England changed our relationship; the longer and further I was away from her, the more she seemed to love me. And I got perspective, too. I grew up thinking she hated me, but that wasn’t the truth. She was just pissed off with the world – and justifiably. I don’t think much of the new White House administration. Ever since George W Bush, I’ve felt nothing but despair about the presidency. The office has become a representative for big business. With Trump and Obama there was, at least, an element of surprise to these unknown entities. Biden and Harris have decades-long records – we know exactly what they stand for. There is no problem on this planet between human beings that couldn’t be solved with 15 minutes of considered conversation. Where I come from in the South we don’t argue to win, but to find a greater truth; we’re as proud to be right as wrong, or not know the answer. Much of the world could do with learning that. A fax to my agent informed me I was a dad. My daughter was 14 and she wanted to know her father. My female friends told me it served me right; it was karma after everything I’d said on stage about women. Parenthood forced me to get reacquainted with my humility, rethink my relationship with responsibility, and to change how I speak about the opposite gender. Britain allowed me to do smart comedy. In America people are troubled by anyone not white yet intelligent. Sure, both countries have racists, but where the UK has elitists, the US has supremacists who want you murdered or incarcerated. Britain’s political and economic system is as corrupt as any, but it’s a nation obsessed with the concept of fairness. I haven’t cried for decades, although one day I’d like to. Real talk? I refused to give in to tears when my mother died, and I haven’t been able to since. Right now, a good cry would do more good for me than an orgasm, but I just can’t get them out of me. Reginald D Hunter: Bombe Shuffleur is on tour from 15 April, tickets at mickperrin.com