Years ago, somebody gave me their recipe for batter, in two ways. One as a long, chatty ramble as she stood making it, then later jotted down on a square of paper – whisk 200g flour, 300ml water, two tablespoons of olive oil and salt until smooth, chill, then fold in two beaten egg whites. The recipe was familiar; almost exactly the proportions I already used – not that familiarity ever dents the satisfaction of being given other people’s recipes. On this occasion, it was two things she said while using a balloon whisk the size of her forearm to combine the flour, water, oil and salt: “Even when measured, ingredients can be mischievous”, and “The consistency should be between single and double cream.” There they were! The sentences I would remember for ever, vivid and annoying in equal measure because they condemned me to be suspicious of my possibly naughty ingredients, and to examine my batter: to watch it roll off the spoon while imagining a place between single and double cream – what the food writer Thom Eagle describes as the silent chat between the cook and the cooked. Or, in my case, the worried discussion (a familiar state for me, so no bad thing), and an essential part of my cooking. Most of the time, ingredients don’t misbehave and the outcome is a batter that clings but doesn’t suffocate. And I have been reminded of the second-most important advice in cooking (and life): just look, really look. The sentences also remind me of my history teacher, Mr Eaton, who would lean by the blackboard and get chalk on his jacket, urging us to note the significant sentence, not only in terms of important or pivotal facts, but also the one that would stick and therefore be useful. Mr Eaton wasn’t only a great teacher, he had a dry humour, so there was never a shortage of eccentricities, rude bits and vivid historical details to hang on to, but also dark sides – many of which I have remembered, and they have been useful. It is the same with food writing and recipes, regardless of whether it is the recipe equivalent of a technical drawing or a wispy, abstract sketch. They have to have key sentences that capture both important or pivotal facts, and you. Eagle is good at this – his book First, Catch, which incidentally has no recipes, is rich with gems that have adhered themselves to my cooking: “Salt should be added, sometimes with abandon, sometimes judiciously, at three distinct stages of cooking: helpfully at the beginning, the middle and the end.” It is the idea of abandon, I think, that has made this one stick, as is the fact that salting is like a good story. Likewise with Yemisi Aribisala, whose descriptions of the crack when cutting okra or the way a fresh egg white falls with a plop (firm and doesn’t budge) are part of my cooking vocabulary, and therefore my chat. Social media, particularly Instagram, has been a great propagator of both the essential sentences and the chat. It is fascinating to see how some people capture the sense and essence of what might usually be page-long recipes into succinct and memorable notes under a photograph. What I cook at night is quite often inspired by an abstract glimpse of something someone else cooked during the day; their craving for beans and greens, pickles, or baked fruit with custard, or something fried in a sandwich, translates into our dinner in Rome. I am less inclined to make manicured, more formal, weight-and-measure recipes shared on social media, maybe because I know I can find them in books. Then there is the accumulated advice under each picture, what the writer Rebecca May Johnson sees as collective recipe gossip; people sharing notes and tips, often in a vivid, mischievous and informal way, sharing not so much recipes, but ideas, thoughts and sentences that stick, or cling – like good batter. See Rachel’s recipes for Tuscan-style chicken and torta alla figassa.