What does it say about capitalism, John asks, that we have money and want to spend it but we can’t find anything worth buying? We’re on our way home from a furniture store, again. We almost bought something called a credenza, but then John opened the drawers and discovered that it wasn’t made to last. I think there are limits, I say, to what mass production can produce. We just bought a house but we don’t have furniture yet. We’ve been eating on our back stoop for three months. Last week a Mexican woman with four children rang our doorbell and asked if our front room was for rent. I’m sorry, I said awkwardly, we live here. She was confused. But, she said, it’s empty. It is empty. I hang curtains to hide the emptiness, but it remains empty. There wasn’t any furniture in the house where I grew up until a German cabinetmaker moved in with us. He arrived in a truck so heavy that it made a dent in the driveway. He filled our dining room with his furniture, and then he made tiny replicas of that furniture with the machines he brought in the truck. I still have the tiny corner cabinet with lattice doors, the tiny hutch with brass knobs and the tiny dining room table with expertly turned legs. They’re in the basement, wrapped in newspaper. The tiny dresser sits atop my dresser, which is from Ikea. The apartment we just left was furnished with shelves that John made out of cheap pine. They’re in the basement now, reduced to lumber. The ammunition box that I found on the kerb and made into a coffee table is in the back yard, planted full of marigolds. I hate furniture, my father once murmured. He had just visited a warehouse full of furniture made of unfinished pine. This was after the cabinetmaker went to a nursing home and his furniture went away, too. As a child, I burned a hole in the dining room table. The cabinetmaker, who smoked a pipe, supplied me with matches. I loved to burn things, but I felt remorse over the table, which I also loved. The lyric “I burned a hole in the dining room table” is tethered, in my mind, to the liner notes of a Billie Holiday album that I borrowed from the library in college. She was singing songs written by someone else, the notes explained, but she rewrote them with the way she sang. Her delivery transformed a banal portrait of moneyed life into a wry critique of that moneyed life. In the furniture stores we visit, I’m filled with a strange unspecific desire. I want everything and nothing. The soft colours of the rugs, the warm wood grains, the brass and glass of the lamps all seem to suggest that the stores are filled with beautiful things, but when I look at any one thing I don’t find it beautiful. “The desire to consume is a kind of lust,” Lewis Hyde wrote. “But consumer goods merely bait this lust, they do not satisfy it. The consumer of commodities is invited to a meal without passion, a consumption that leads to neither satiation nor fire.” In the end, all the furniture we buy will feel like lyrics written for someone else’s song, except the dining room table made by the Amish. This table will be solid cherry, a beautiful wood. It will be well made, but not quite as well made as the table I grew up with, the table I burned. To get a table like that, we would need to spend much more money. Or we would need a German cabinetmaker to move in with us. “I once had a girl / Or I should say, she once had me,” the car radio sings. John and I both fall silent. It’s been a long time since I’ve heard this song. And I don’t know if I’ve ever really listened to the ending. What happened there, I wonder. Did he make a fire in the fireplace while the girl was at work? No, John tells me, he burned her place down. He is sure of this, but I am not so sure. I can’t stop thinking about it. Norwegian Wood. It bothers me. Soon I’m reading interviews with the Beatles. “It was pine really, cheap pine,” McCartney said about the wood panelling that inspired the title. About the ending, he said: “It could have meant I lit a fire to keep myself warm, and wasn’t the decor of her house wonderful? But it didn’t, it meant I burned the fucking place down.” Our house is a brick bungalow, nearly identical to the house next door. These houses were built by brothers, both dead now. I learn this from my neighbour, who lives in the other brother’s house. He’s a retired postal worker and a saxophone player who still practises every day, though his health is now too poor for him to perform. The interiors of our houses are the same, he tells me, except for my attic, which the former owners of our house renovated. He would like to renovate his attic, too, but he doesn’t have the money. Some relatives of his are in prison and all his extra money goes to supporting their families. I guess God, he says, doesn’t want me to have money. I’m not sure, but I think he’s joking about God. He has told me, already, about attending the same elementary school my son attends, and of being beaten up in the playground. He has told me that he couldn’t, in those days, risk a conversation with a woman like me. He had to keep his head down when he passed a white woman on the sidewalk, he said, and just respond Yes, ma’am if she spoke to him. He has told me, also, of refusing a holiday turkey offered to him by the owner of a mansion by the lake, a rich man who demanded that he wade through deep snow to deliver packages to the service entrance at the back of the house. The former owners of our house, who were white, made extra money by allowing the house to be used as a set for commercials. John discovers this when he gets a call from a casting director who wants to know if the house is available. It’s not available – we live here. But then we learn how much we will be paid. All we have to do is leave the house for three days and two nights and we will earn $8,000. The commercial is going to be for Walmart, the corporation that produced the fortunes of three of the 20 richest people in this country. Walmart couldn’t build stores in Chicago for years but they’re here now, despite ongoing protests over low wages, and they want their commercial set in a classic Chicago bungalow. We don’t own anything from Walmart, but this doesn’t matter because Walmart furniture is moved into the house, Walmart curtains are put up, and some Walmart prints are hung on the walls in Walmart frames. A white set designer and a white director work to create an authentic African American interior. The commercial, they tell us, is going to feature an African American grandmother serving a holiday turkey. Next door, in the house just like ours, lives an actual African American grandmother, the wife of the retired postal worker. We’re getting paid to have our house made over to look like what a set designer imagines their house looks like so that Walmart can try to sell things to people who look like them. John tells all this to his friend Dan, who says, I think that’s the definition of white privilege. I don’t understand, my mother says. How is that the definition of white privilege? This isn’t the first punchline she’s ruined. My mother dropped out of high school and later, after college and a divorce, she nearly dropped out of the middle class. She still has white privilege, but she often does not have hot water. I admire how thoroughly she has discarded the life she was born into, the silver in the sideboard and the opera on the record player. She has kept only the books. In one of the fairy tales she told me as a child, a girl is pursued by a witch. As the girl runs, she throws behind her the things she carries in her pockets, the things her mother has given her. She throws down a hairbrush that becomes a thick forest. She throws down a hand mirror that becomes a lake between her and the witch. You must throw away everything you’ve been given, my mother might say. That much I understand. But it has only just occurred to me to wonder what witch she’s running from. And if her witch will be my witch, too. She used to trade eggs from her chickens to a neighbour for expired bread, still good. And when she drove us home from school she would stop at a dumpster behind a restaurant to salvage fruit, also still good. I once asked my mother if she had a retirement account and she laughed at me. I’ve never had anything like that, she said. And then she said, after a pause, My children are my retirement account. You were my investment. She had four children by the time she was 30, but she had no income, no contributions to social security. I was without children at thirty and already working for the university. I have a retirement account, which puts me in a poor position to explain privilege to my mother. Nobody understands privilege as well as those who don’t have it. I guess, I tell her, I don’t understand, either. I’m taking possession of the house by painting it, every room. And the question of what colour in what room is consuming me. I think maybe I should start with historical colours, but I can see the original colour of the walls under the layers of chipped paint: cloying pink. Maybe memory, not history, is the place to start. Buttered Yam, from my mother’s garden. Evening Blue, an old bottle half-buried in the dirt. Forest Moss, the colour of my mother’s little living room, which smelled like woodsmoke. Color(ed) Theory Suite, a work in which artist Amanda Williams painted houses slated for demolition on the South Side of Chicago, began as a collection of colours: Harold’s Chicken Shack Red, Crown Royal Purple, Pink Oil, Ultrasheen Blue, Flamin’ Hot Orange, Currency Exchange Yellow. “This palette combined my Ivy League academic training as an architect with my lived sensibility as a South Side native,” she says. Each house was painted a single colour, from the bricks of the foundation to the shingles on the roof. She painted only houses that weren’t worth anything to anyone – not to dealers, not to squatters, not to neighbourhood teenagers. “Zero-value” was her term. And she painted these zero-value properties in colours drawn from products sold to black people. Every colour, she says, is a code. I’m having trouble finding the right white. I don’t like Opulence White or Chantilly Lace or French Manicure. This conversation is boring, my sister complains. Maybe I’ll give up on white, I tell her, and paint the living room peach. Peach is problematic, she says, laughing at me now. I’ve discovered a brand of paint that I can’t afford. But I could buy it. To afford something like paint, for someone of my class, is to announce your values, most often, not your financial capacity. I can’t admit to valuing paint that costs $110 a gallon. But I find this paint unbearably luminous, and undeniably better than any other paint. At night, when my family is asleep, I study paint swatches from the hardware store and then I open the heavy folds of the catalogue from Farrow & Ball and run my fingers over the small squares of paint, slightly raised in estate emulsion. Even the names are better: Matchstick, String, Cord, Skimming Stone. These are not aspirational whites – these whites can afford to be modest. One is even called Blackened. I remember the great revelation of moving up from acrylic paints in high school to oil paints in college. First just black and white on paper, and then a full set on canvas. They were worth the expense, those silken oils in their slim metal tubes. I loved all the colours, especially the cadmium orange, which was slightly toxic. Flamin’ hot. This is the closest I’ve come to painting in years, shopping for paint. I send a swatch of Sulking Room Pink to Robyn, knowing she’ll appreciate the name. “To sulk” in French is bouder, the source of boudoir, a woman’s private room. A room of one’s own, in a dusty, moneyed pink. And then there’s Etiquette, a white described as “a well-mannered hue”. It’s a white that’s hiding behind its own whiteness. Another line for this white poem. My mind is on paint now more often than poetry. I’ve found a new literature: Crisp Linen, Collector’s Item, White Zinfandel, Pashmina, Fine China, Ivory Tower, Mirage White, American White. The paint company Benjamin Moore has declared Simply White the Colour of the Year. This, in 2016, the year a white man will be elected to the White House. The selection of white as the Colour of the Year was “inevitable,” the creative director of Benjamin Moore says. “The colour white is transcendent, powerful, and polarising – it is either taken for granted or obsessed over.” I obsess, which solves nothing. Deep in Thought is my favourite name for a white, but I don’t really like the colour. I wouldn’t want my walls Deep in Thought. On my way to a parent-teacher conference I stop in the hallway of the elementary school to photograph a huge box of institutional toilet paper, the colour listed on the label as Empathy White. Maybe that’s the colour I’m looking for. Or a variant, a concerned off-white like All Apologies. Or something more revealing, like Paperwork White or Payroll White. Or maybe I should just paint it all Property. The catalogues keep coming. I don’t know how they find us, or how to make them stop. Sometimes, two of the same catalogue arrive on the same day. They accumulate in piles, outdoing each other with heavier paper and richer colours. Then the Restoration Hardware catalogue arrives, like a parody of the whole problem, in two volumes, each the size of a telephone book. These are bigger and heavier than my grandfather’s two-volume set of Illustrated English Social History. We put the Restoration Hardware catalogues near the fireplace and sit on them. The Ikea catalogue has a message on the front: “Designed for people, not consumers.” In the photograph, some young people are having a fun, unfussy dinner at a crowded table. There are dirty dishes piled on a cart and a guitar is leaning against the wall. The Ikea catalogue sits on top of a pile of catalogues with photographs of sterile rooms showcasing furniture that has never been touched. This other, messier way of life, Ikea suggests, is not just less expensive, it is more human. John and I have a set of two dressers from Ikea, and Nick and Robyn have the same two dressers. Nick’s is his second of this dresser – the bottoms dropped out of all the drawers in the first one. It was like a building with a perfect facade, Robyn said, where all the floors had collapsed into the basement. I remember a brownstone in New York City like that, with trees growing inside. And a foreclosure in the suburbs still pristine on the outside, but stripped of all its fixtures inside, even the wires and the pipes. The dresser is simple and Shaker in its design. Shakers believed that the end of the world was near, which would seem to be an argument for temporary furniture, but making something built to last was, for them, an act of prayer. “Do all your work as if you had 1,000 years to live,” Mother Ann Lee told her brethren, “and as you would if you knew you must die tomorrow.” There aren’t many Shakers left. Their furniture has outlasted them, as it was meant to. Their values, I was told by a tour guide at the village where Ann Lee died, which I visited as a school child, were embodied in their furniture. I wonder if a Shaker dresser, taken out of the context of Shaker life, still embodies the Shaker dedication to celibacy and hard work. Perhaps it whispers to its owner at night. Maybe my dresser is where my doubts come from. In that village, I saw Shaker chairs hung on pegs and I was taught to sing a Shaker song. The furniture didn’t interest me, but I was captivated by the song, especially the last two lines: “To turn, turn, will be our delight / Till by turning, turning, we come round right.” In my 20s I moved 10 times. On the fourth or fifth move, when I was leaving New York, I left behind a bed frame that my mother had made. It was simple and spare with no headboard – Shaker almost – and designed for celibacy in that it was narrower than a single bed. My mother was upset when she learned that I had abandoned it. I tried to explain that I wasn’t leading a life that allowed for furniture. In California, I slept on a slab of foam that could easily be rolled up and moved anywhere. My boyfriend, who kept his clothes in a large cardboard box, suggested that we make all our furniture out of cardboard boxes. It was an idea that had already been pioneered by Ikea, who made chipboard end tables with hollow interiors. “The ease of self-invention that Ikea enables is liberating,” Lauren Collins wrote, “but it can be sad to be able to make a life, or dispose of it, so cheaply.” Within a year, I had rolled up my mattress and moved my boxes to Iowa, where I found my furniture on the street. “A better everyday life for the many people” is Ikea’s mission, on paper. I think of all the Ikea furniture that I have seen eaten by life. The end tables with broken legs, the cracked slats of futon frames, the chipboard desks left out on the kerb and destroyed by the rain before they can be taken to a new home. Ikea, one of the largest consumers of wood in the world, has made furniture into something that gets used up. It is furniture for the apocalypse. But what I like – what makes me laugh a little about “for people, not consumers” – is the implication that consumers are not people. ‘A metaphor is all this really is,” David Graeber wrote. He means consumption, which was once the name for a wasting disease, and is now the word anthropologists use for almost everything we do outside of work – eating, shopping, reading, listening to music. Consume, he notes, is from the Latin consumere, meaning “to seize or take over completely”. A person might consume food or be consumed by rage. In its earliest usage, consumption always implied destruction. Consumption was the opposite of production in Adam Smith’s Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. He made this inquiry in 1776, when work was being relocated into factories and lives were newly divided between home and work. We still use the maths of that time to subtract what is consumed at home from what is produced at work. In that crude equation, only work that earns money is productive. And as long as there’s no third quantity, like reproduction, the equation works out to zero. She ate it, my father told my sister years ago, when she wondered what happened to my stereo. This was during my first year in New York, and the money for the stereo was a gift from my father, who had told me that he would pay for my college tuition and nothing else, ever. He had three more children to send to college. The stereo was an exception, a surprise for my birthday, and I did eat it. I wanted a stereo but I needed food. Food is destroyed by our consumption, but silverware is not, though the metaphor behind the word suggests that we eat up even our own silverware and dishes, too. “We should think about how far we want to extend the metaphor,” Graeber warned. Yes, we consume fossil fuels, in the “eat up, devour, waste, spend” sense of the word. But we don’t consume music. Music becomes part of us, as food does, but it isn’t destroyed in the process. What is destroyed when we think of ourselves as consumers, Graeber suggested, is the possibility that we might be doing something productive outside of work. • This is an edited extract from Having and Being Had by Eula Biss, published by Faber & Faber and available at guardianbookshop.com • Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, sign up to the long read weekly email here, and find our podcasts here