David Mitchell and Robert Webb reunite for a second series of this pub landlord sitcom, playing estranged foster siblings. With Andrew (Webb) having taken over the family boozer, the John Barleycorn, he is now feeling held back by its responsibilities, while Stephen (Mitchell) seems far more relaxed and self-assured after his time away. A new gastro-pub down the road soon changes that, though, especially since they are hoping to poach a member of the Barleycorn staff. Ammar Kalia The tiny builds continue apace. This week, George meets Chris and Jodie, who are turning a broken-down camper van into a mini caravan, while another couple turn a derelict railway carriage into a cabin. Will Hardie is back at the observatory build, taking photos with a beer can. AK The series that goes under the dustsheets at one of London’s most storied institutions continues. Among the highlights of this episode is a voyage to the tank room, a repository of hooked tentacles, briny carcasses and other aquatic nightmare fuel. Graeme Virtue Following the US presidential inauguration, Mary Beard is joined by the satirist Armando Iannucci to analyse the historical question of succession. The pair discuss how UK and US leaders are represented in the media and how that affects their legacies, with focus on life after President Trump. AK Ralf Little’s DI Parker is at his sneezy best as murder continues to lap gently at the sun-soaked shores of Saint Marie. This week, JP has his hands full as he gets ready for his twins’ birth: he has a new officer to train. All that is before a lottery winner’s body disappears, just after she was found dead. Hannah Verdier Anne Hegerty, Shaun Wallace and Mark Labbett – best known as the biggest brains on prime-time TV – seal their success with that TV rite of passage: the travelogue. Of course, there is a twist – they are on a mission to take on fellow brainboxes – starting with a bonobo. Hannah J Davies Ministry of Fear (Fritz Lang, 1944), 12.50pm, Film4Little remains of Graham Greene’s source novel, but Lang creates a gripping, gloomy, suspense-filled tale. It stars Ray Milland as a man who, after spending two years in a mental institution for murdering his wife, is plunged into a fresh nightmare with spies in wartime London. A superbly atmospheric thriller. Paul Howlett European Tour golf: The Abu Dhabi HSBC Championship 6am, Sky Sports Main Event. First day’s play at the Abu Dhabi Golf Club. World Rally Championship 3.30pm, BT Sport 1. Racing from Rallye Monte-Carlo, the first round of the season. Premier League football: Liverpool v Burnley 7.30pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Top-flight match from Anfield.