Australian football is in mourning following the death of former Socceroos coach Frank Arok aged 88. “We are deeply saddened to learn that former @Socceroos coach, Frank Arok AM, has passed away at the age of 88,” Football Australia tweeted on Tuesday night. “Frank made a telling impact on Australian football, coaching the Socceroos in 89 internationals, and at the Seoul 1988 Olympic Games. “Frank also made a significant contribution to club football in Australia, coaching numerous sides and mentoring hundreds of successful players in the National Soccer League.” Arok’s record as national coach was strong with Australia winning 41 of the 89 fixtures when he was in charge. His teams recorded 22 draws. Very sad to hear about the passing of Frank Arok. Your knowledge, passion and dedication of the game was infectious. The 2 years I had the privilege to work with you @clubmarconi1958 were some of my most enjoyable times in football. R.I.P #aussielegend #soccerooslegend #NSL pic.twitter.com/ZoG47i0tKy Football Australia said Arok’s profound impact on the game locally would never be forgotten. The Yugoslav-born legend played for FK Jedinstvo for a decade in the 1950s before moving to Australia in the late 1960s and making his name as one of the great Australian managers. He coached St George Budapest, as well as South Melbourne FC, Port Melbourne, Gippsland Falcons and Sydney Olympic but is best remembered for his role as coach of the Australian national team. He was in charge of the Socceroos between 1983 and early 1990 and made a Member of the Order of Australia in the 1990 Australia Day honours for his service to soccer. After working with Perth Glory’s youth team between 2001 and 2003, Arok moved back to Serbia with his wife to retire. 'That' Kelic header that won the derby against the Knights and the unforgettable reaction by Frank Arok following the final whistle.#RipFrankArok pic.twitter.com/k2u8GjqxNq Fellow former Socceroos coach Frank Farina and English Premier League winner Robbie Slater were others to post their condolences on Twitter. “Frank Arok RIP ! The man that discovered and made me ! Thank you ! A true legend ! @Socceroos,” Slater posted. Others said he was among the five most influential figures in Australian soccer history.