England’s chief nurse has said NHS and care staff are working “incredibly hard” to cope with record numbers of Covid-19 patients, amid concern that frontline staff are close to burnout. Ruth May pleaded with the public to follow the coronavirus advice to help relieve the pressure on hospital staff, after two days of record hospital admissions. She tweeted: “My fellow nurses and other fantastic NHS and care staff are working incredibly hard to care for record numbers of very sick patients with Covid-19 so please, please follow the advice: remember ‘hands face, space’ and stay home to save lives.” Adrian Boyle, the vice-president of the Royal College of Emergency Medicine, told BBC Breakfast that health employees were “tired, frustrated and fed up”. He said: “What is it going to be like over the next couple of months? I don’t know, I am worried. We are very much at battle stations. “There will be short-term surges of morale but people are tired, frustrated and fed up, as everybody is, whether they work in hospital or not. The people who go into emergency medicine expect it to be tough from time to time. “There is a real worry about burnout.” Dr Chaand Nagpaul, the chair of the British Medical Association council, said the NHS was “buckling under the strain”. In a new year message, he said the NHS was “in the midst of a third wave fuelled by a new variant of the virus, with increasing reports of hospitals declaring major incidents, ICU beds reaching 100% capacity in parts of the country, and patients having to be transferred to other hospitals for care. “The months ahead will be as challenging, if not more so, as when the virus first peaked in April. We know from our tracker surveys that over four in 10 doctors’ mental health has deteriorated during the pandemic, with many exhausted from working flat out without taking adequate leave for over 10 months.” The Royal College of Nursing’s England director, Mike Adams, said staff leave was being cancelled to deal with the surge in demand. Adams told Sky News the expectation of a mass rollout in capacity through the Nightingale hospitals was misplaced. Adams said: “If we are having to cancel leave to staff these areas, the obvious question is: where will the staff come from to open the Nightingales? “I am sure there will be moves to open some beds; there are some beds open in different Nightingale hospitals in different areas of the country. I have real concerns that the expectation that this mass rollout in capacity can happen is misplaced because there aren’t the staff to do it.” The concerns come after major incidents were declared in both Buckinghamshire after a 60% rise in Covid among people over 60 years old, and Essex where patients were airlifted from an overwhelmed hospital in Southend to a hospital in Cambridge. Lisa Ward, a lead respiratory nurse for Southend hospital, tweeted last night that the hospital was in a “very bad way”. Ward pleaded with the public to stay at home. @everythingleigh @LoveLeighRoad @AroundSS9 @LeighOnSeacom @YourSouthend @WestcliffonSea Just come home from our hospital + I implore you-believe me, we are in a very bad way. Stay home during the DAY or NIGHT. Dont buy alcohol/coffee etc from pub windows- @MSEHospitals distance ! Homerton hospital in east London has asked administrative staff to help cover ward clerk shifts. It tweeted that they had “all hands to the pump supporting our frontline staff”.