In late 1985, the year before my international debut, Australia played a World Cup qualifying play-off against Scotland. The Socceroos were beaten 2-0 in the away leg at Hampden Park by a side managed by Alex Ferguson and featuring Kenny Dalglish and Frank McAvennie. Australia’s coach, Frank Arok, declared to the Australian Soccer Federation he wanted to stage the home leg on a beach in Darwin. The theory was a beautiful pitch on a beautiful evening would not serve us well against a team arriving from the throes of a northern-hemisphere winter. Unfortunately, money talks, and Darwin on sand does not draw a crowd. In the end it was held at Melbourne’s Olympic Park. It was indeed a beautiful night, and on one of the best surfaces in the country. We drew 0-0 and Mexico 86 fell out of reach. Frank, who died this week aged 88, was always thinking outside the square. In the lead-up to the 1988 Olympics in Seoul, he had us training training on a grass car park at Sydney’s St George Stadium. There were potholes everywhere, and if you kicked the ball high enough you could practically hit the aeroplanes as they were taking off. We did not endure this because of a lack of facilities – Arok had been to Korea, and he knew the sorts of grounds on which we would have to play. He spent months preparing for our first group-stage game against gold-medal favourites Yugoslavia. The fact we won it 1-0 was partly down to our unconventional preparation. That also came in the form of physical and mental endurance. Twice a day we trained despite working 9-5 in our regular jobs. The morning session started at 6am and consisted of track drills. Under half-light we began with 6 x 1,500m intervals. The following morning it was 20 x 400m. The next, 50 x 100m. And finally, 100 x 50m. Even he admits he just made the program up, and I am not sure sports scientists now would consider this a wise way to prepare for an Olympics. But his methods got into our heads, and in our minds we could run over the top of anybody. Motivation was magnified by the interstate rivalry between our two training centres in Melbourne and Sydney. As it happened, those of us in Melbourne were sprinting around a “400m track” that in reality measured only 330m, so we were running world-record times. Frank knew something was awry but made a point of not measuring that track because it made for perfect ammunition to keep the players in Sydney on their game. Most of the time we were just trying to keep up. I had little chance of that during my first training sessions as a Socceroo when, outside the dressing room at St George Stadium, he assembled some pub coasters on the floor. This makeshift football formation was our tactical session. We were informed who was playing where and taken, in minute detail, through phases of play. Almost in an instant, I had lost track of my coaster. Given they were not labelled, I was not the only one, but he had a knack for utilising the resources available. The year of 1988 was a big one for us. Two months before the Olympics, we defeated world champions Argentina 4-1 at the Bicentennial Gold Cup. Only 19,000 saw it at Sydney Football Stadium. After the game Frank said, “you are never going to do this again, we must have a drink”. We went down to the bar at our hotel, the two-and-a-half-star Camperdown Travel Lodge. We finished at 4am. It was Thursday night, and on Sunday we were due to play the Gold Cup final against Brazil. It was ludicrous, but Frank wanted us to grab that moment and remember it forever. There was no point, he said, celebrating after we’d been beaten 2-0 in the final by Brazil. By then, the moment is gone. This was how it went with Frank. Not a perfectionist but perfectly unorthodox. Always intense. Always covered in sweat. Always with watch in hand, rarely on his wrist. He once told me he did that because “time never stops”. Always forward-thinking. It did not for those seven years he oversaw the national team, with 41 wins from his 89 games – including 48 ‘A’ internationals – between 1983 and 1990. Those two wins, against Argentina and Yugoslavia, were not massive in a World Cup qualifying sense. But they were massive for Australian football, and they deserved more publicity. Frank was the mastermind behind both, and so much more. Through him, a new generation of Socceroos learned that Australians are not second-class footballers. He taught us that a 1-0 loss, even to the world’s best, is not good enough. He taught us how to be upset about that, how to want more, and how to walk off the pitch having given everything. As told to Emma Kemp Paul Wade played 119 matches for Australia including at the 1988 Olympic Games and in two FIFA World Cup qualification campaigns. He captained the Socceroos from 1990 to 1996.