For the first time in 182 long days, Sheffield United savoured that winning feeling after surviving a FA Cup third-round scare at Bristol Rovers. It was not a vintage performance and the League One side twice pulled level but the Premier League strugglers eventually prospered from this five-goal affair after Jayden Bogle scored what proved to be the winner within seconds of Rovers equalising for a second time. After 18 defeats from their previous 21 matches, Chris Wilder could be forgiven for not caring how they got the job done. “When you’re in this situation, any result is gladly accepted,” said Wilder, whose last win came against Chelsea in July. “I thought we played OK to well. We needed a win, obviously, because of the form and the results that we have produced so far, so we needed that win for the players and for the football club. It’s a big win for us because of the run we’ve been on. We had to get that result for the players and the supporters.” Wilder acknowledged Rovers would be licking their lips at the prospect of adding salt to a deep wound and, until Bogle’s strike on 63 minutes, they appeared to have the measure of the visitors, who were susceptible at set pieces and twice punished for some slack marking. Alfie Kilgour powered in a header from a free-kick beyond Aaron Ramsdale and, in the second half, the Rovers captain, Max Ehmer, prodded in at the back post after Jack Baldwin kept Zain Westbrooke’s corner alive. From there, though, Rovers came unstuck and less than a minute later Sheffield United regained the lead. They twice left the door open to hand Rovers a route back in but Bogle ultimately had the final say, building on goals by Lys Mousset and Oliver Burke to record a rare victory. This season has been a slog but Wilder was able to see the funny side after making life difficult here, with Osborn – arguably the man of the match – Burke and David McGoldrick squandering chances to put the game beyond doubt. “Our history is not comfortable – it’s feast or famine,” he said. “And we’re pretty hungry at the moment.” Fulham required extra time to reach the fourth round after goals by Bobby Decordova-Reid and Neeskens Kebano earned victory over QPR but in-form Leicester powered past Stoke 4-0, propelled by a wonderful solo strike by the full‑back James Justin, who cut inside Tommy Smith before dispatching a curling effort into the top corner. Goals by Marc Albrighton, Ayoze Pérez and Harvey Barnes completed the scoring. “The first goal is important and from that point we were very good,” said Brendan Rodgers, the Leicester manager. “We have a good team that is mobile and it was about making sure we ran into the spaces, nice and aggressive.” Doncaster of League One dumped out Blackburn courtesy of Taylor Richards’ third goal of the season three minutes before half-time and Plymouth also triumphed against Championship opposition, with captain Joe Edwards scoring the winner in a 3-2 victory at Huddersfield, who twice took the lead. Managerless Sheffield Wednesday avoided an upset by overcoming Exeter 2-0 at St James Park. Elsewhere, Championship high‑flyers Bournemouth were made to work to advance to the fourth round as Joshua King scored his first goals of the season against Oldham, who agreed for the game to be moved to the Vitality Stadium owing to concerns over the pitch at Boundary Park. Millwall avoided embarrassment at Meadow Park as they comfortably overcame Boreham Wood of the National League. “I think it was a professional job in the end, it was a difficult game with our current form and perhaps not being as confident as we would like to be,” said the Millwall manager, Gary Rowett. “It’s always difficult to come to a non‑league ground.”