James Bond film No Time To Die has been delayed again as Hollywood grapples with the continued disruption caused by the pandemic. Daniel Craig’s final outing as 007 will now arrive on 8 October, the official Bond Twitter account announced. It had been set to be released in April following multiple pandemic-enforced delays. No Time To Die is the latest major release to be pushed back as Hollywood studios scramble to protect their films from certain box office doom, with cinemas remaining closed in markets around the world. Despite once saying he would rather take his own life than reprise his role as 007, Daniel Craig confirms he will return as James Bond for the franchise's 25th movie. Danny Boyle confirms he is working on a script for the next Bond film alongside his Trainspotting collaborator John Hodge. EON Productions’ Michael G Wilson and Barbara Broccoli, the custodians of the Bond movies, confirm production will begin at the start of December 2018, with the film released in the UK on 25 October 2019 and in the US a fortnight later. Boyle quits the movie over 'creative differences'. Sources close to the production confirm that the next 007 movie will miss its scheduled release date, after disputes between the director, producers and star Craig Writers Neal Purvis and Robert Wade return to James Bond for a seventh time, following Boyle’s late-hour departure from the project. True Detective's Cary Fukunaga is named as the new director. Another new writer arrives as Bourne Ultimatum writer Scott Z Burns is hired to rewrite the screenplay. The working title of the film - Shatterhand - is released to widespread derision. At the risk of being labelled 'too PC' about the climate emergency, it emerges that Bond will be behind the wheel of an electric Aston Martin Rapide E in the new film. Riding high on the back of the success of Fleabag, Phoebe Waller-Bridge is reported to have been brought in to liven up new Bond script. The production enjoys a glitzy launch in Jamaica, officially adding Rami Malek to the cast, but failing to reveal the movie's new name. Daniel Craig requires surgery on an ankle injured during the filming, putting him out of action for at least two weeks. The official James Bond social media account announced the news, saying production would continue while Craig 'rehabilitates'. An explosion on the set injures a crew member and damages the outside of the famous 007 Stage at Pinewood Studios, Buckinghamshire. The name of the movie is revealed to be No Time To Die. The first release date for the movie passes as Covid begins to impact world cinema. A second proposed release date slips, as coronavirus continues to affect the global economy. Yet another delay as release is pushed back again until 8 October 2021, 14 months later than planned. Earlier this month Warner Bros announced it was delaying the release of Sopranos prequel The Many Saints Of Newark. And after MGM released the Bond news, Sony said Peter Rabbit 2: The Runaway was moving from April to June, Ghostbusters: Afterlife was pushed from June to November and Cinderella, which stars singer Camila Cabello, will now arrive in July. Video game adaptation Uncharted has been shifted from 2021 and moved to February 2022, Sony said, while Jared Leto superhero flick Morbius, which did have the 8 October slot now occupied by No Time To Die, is now slated for January next year. No Time To Die was the first major film to fall victim to the pandemic when its April 2020 release was pushed to November as the virus swept around the world. In October it was delayed to April when it became clear Covid-19 was still rampant and cinemas would not be widely reopening. As well as the film industry, the wider entertainment world has been battered by the pandemic. On Thursday it was announced the Glastonbury music festival had been cancelled for a second successive year.