Life-threatening flash flooding and up to 300mm of rain are possible in parts of northern Queensland as ex-Tropical Cyclone Imogen tracks across the region, while parts of Victoria and eastern New South Wales have also been hit by heavy rain and flooding. The Bureau of Meteorology has advised Imogen was located 60km east-north-east of Georgetown at 4am AEST and is forecast to track slowly in an east-south-east direction. A trough extended eastwards through the north tropical coast and tablelands to the south of Innisfail and is forecast to slowly move south. Widespread heavy rainfall could affect areas between Tully and Townsville in the morning before it extends to about Ayr during the rest of Tuesday. Several flood warnings are current throughout the area for locations including Townsville, Ingham, Cardwell, Ayr, Giru, Atherton, Ravenshoe, Greenvale and Charters Towers. Tropical Cyclone Imogen crossed the coast north of Karumba shortly before 11pm on Sunday before slowly weakening to a tropical low on Monday. About 1,400 houses were left without power, but there were no reports of injuries, police commissioner Katarina Carroll said. “It would appear at this stage there is no massive damage either, but there is a lot of water,” she told reporters on Monday. The system dumped 262mm of rain in Normanton, with 186mm of that falling in six hours up until 3am on Monday, the Bureau of Meteorology’s Pieter Claassen said. In Victoria, heavy rainfall fell across Gippsland overnight and flood warnings were in place. The highest falls were 96.4mm at Balook, 83.2mm at Yarram and 59mm at Mt Tassie. Rainfall totals of around 20-40mm over 12 hours are expected within the warning area, with isolated heavier totals of up to 60mm, but conditions are expected to ease throughout the day. Locations which may be affected include Morwell, Traralgon, Sale, Moe, Bairnsdale and Orbost. In NSW, fast-moving thunderstorms lashed much of east of the state including Sydney on Monday night, felling trees and causing flash flooding that has left some rural communities isolated. By 6.15pm on Monday the State Emergency Service had responded to 281 call-outs across the state, the majority for trees down, leaking roofs and requests for sandbags to prevent property inundations. SES spokesman Andrew McCullough said two people had to be rescued from vehicles caught by floodwaters at Gloucester on the mid-north coast and at Gulgong just north of Mudgee. Rain streaming across #Gippsland dropped 96.4mm at Balook & 83.2mm at Yarram Apt in 24 hours to 9am today... and it's still going!Heaviest rain should contract eastwards today, easing this evening. 🌧️🌧️🌧️See ⚠️Severe Weather Warning for details: https://t.co/HKIuzbVL8v pic.twitter.com/qLGtYjT8Hk He said on Monday evening around 1,600 people remained isolated by floodwaters on the mid-north coast where one man had to be rescued after he was trapped in his home near Wauchope. “We’re certainly expecting this unsettled weather to continue during the week with the occasional thunderstorm coming through and that could be anywhere across the state so we’re just asking people to be prepared over the coming days.” The Bureau of Meteorology issued severe thunderstorm warnings as the system drove in from the west, hitting Penrith then across Sydney. The warnings were later extended to the Hunter region including Newcastle. Ausgrid said a number of NSW towns and Sydney suburbs had power cuts due to the storms.