Lee Cheuk-yan has seen a lot during his 63 years in Hong Kong, but this week for the first time he felt horror. On Wednesday at dawn, 1,000 police swept the city, carrying out mass arrests of 55 people associated with a move to bring about a democratic election. Dozens of students, social workers, lawyers and politicians were rounded up without warning in the biggest assault on opposition since the implementation of the national security law (NSL) in June. For Lee, a veteran activist, former legislator and one of the few people who were not caught in the dragnet, the “absurdity” of the crackdown was chilling. “Yesterday’s events, the horror of them, was so unimaginable and unpredictable, in how the Communist party is using the national security law,” he says, his voice ringing with incredulity. “[The primaries] were not remotely close to anything concerning national security but they used the law anyway.” The NSL was imposed by Beijing after the mass pro-democracy protests of 2019. It broadly defined and criminalised acts of subversion, secession, foreign collusion, and terrorism. Those arrested on Wednesday – including the already jailed activists Joshua Wong and Tam Tak Chi - were accused of subversion. The group included six alleged organisers and every single candidate involved in an unofficial primary by the pro-democracy camp last year. You can’t dare to oppose anything. There can only be obedient lawmakers Their arrests were revealed by a drip feed of social media posts and dramatic live streams. World governments condemned the crackdown, and in the US Mike Pompeo, the outgoing secretary of state, threatened further sanctions over the “campaign of political repression”. But inside Hong Kong the aftershocks of the unprecedented day were felt the strongest. It was as if opposition itself had become illegal. “The purpose is twofold,” says Lee. “One is to continue putting fear in the minds of the people so they can rule by that fear. And the second is to wipe out any opposition in Hong Kong who might try to challenge them.” Lee expects to go to jail. He is facing at least four separate criminal trials this year over protest-related charges, but has not stopped speaking out in the meantime. “Anyone in Hong Kong in a way has to be ready for spend some time in jail,” he says. “You can still fight on with your spirit, and physically we can’t be restrained by jail sentences.” His is one of the few voices of dissent left in Hong Kong. The entire democratic caucus has either resigned or been disqualified from the legislative council. Dozens have been arrested under the NSL for acts of speech, and veteran leaders such as Martin Lee stopped talking about democracy in public months ago. The movement’s most well-known figures – Jimmy Lai, Joshua Wong, Agnes Chow, Ivan Lam, and Tony Chung – are in jail, while others like Nathan Law, Ted Hui, Pastor Ray Chan, and Sunny Cheung have fled overseas. Cheung, 25, left Hong Kong after he ran as a candidate in the primaries, and watched from afar as “the whole pro-democracy camp was eradicated by the Beijing government, totally crushed”. “I’m really concerned about the future of activism,” he tells the Guardian. “You can’t really fulfil the responsibility of being a lawmaker any more. You can’t dare to oppose anything, there can only be obedient lawmakers.” Wednesday’s roundup more than doubled the number of people arrested under the NSL. At least four media groups were ordered to hand over information, reportedly including contact details. Staff at the public broadcaster, RTHK, were warned by their boss not to interview any of the group. In the wake of the arrests, civic groups began disbanding or moving their operations and servers overseas. Others shut down WhatsApp groups, deleted membership records, and reassessed the security of donors. The Hong Kong Alliance, chaired by Lee, accelerated its digitisation of historical documents about the Tiananmen Square massacre to move it out of the jurisdiction. Carl Mizner, Fordham University law professor and Chinese governance expert, says “decapitating civil society” was a crucial step in Beijing’s plans to “thoroughly dominate Hong Kong”. “Rounding up and arresting anyone with a demonstrated capability to mobilise significant popular support is just a start,” he said. The legal basis for the arrests lies in article 22 of the NSL, defining the crime of subversion to include organising or planning to seriously interfere, disrupt or undermine “the performance of duties and functions” by the Central or Hong Kong governments. The primaries drew an estimated 600,000 people out to vote. Under the banner of “democracy 35+” candidates pledged to win the majority of the legislative council’s 70 seats and vote down the government’s budget, eventually forcing the resignation of chief executive Carrie Lam. Government statements said this was enough to fit the NSL’s definition of subversion, but many disagreed. Alan Leong, a lawyer and member of the Civic party who remains in Hong Kong, says authorities had failed to explain how the actions of the 55 were illegal and the accusation was “ridiculous in the extreme”. Leong and others said there was a belief in political circle that even if the arrests never amount to convictions, the move was designed to prevent them from running in elections, and scare others away, effectively ending political resistance. Lee says there is now no chance of fair elections in Hong Kong in the future, because the authorities had “cleansed the opposition”. “Once you start to say you want to win, they’ll use the national security law against you. The whole primary exercise was to say we want a majority,” he says. “So what’s the point of an election if trying to win is a national security threat? That’s the absurdity.” Yet Regina Ip, a pro-Beijing legislator, believes there will at least always be an opposition. “In the [previous] elections, many complete unknowns were elected so long as they ran under a pro-democracy banner. There will be sympathy for those from the pan democratic camp,” she says. As an aspiring candidate in exile, Cheung still believes there is a future. “When the repression is obviously much stronger than the resistance we can provide right now, maybe many of us have to stay low and be patient, to wait for the next wave to come out on the streets,” he said. By Friday morning nearly all the arrested had been released on police bail, their passports confiscated. None had been charged. “Hong Kong has entered a cold winter, the wind is strong and cold,” Tai said on his release. “But I believe many Hongkongers will still use their own way to move forward against the wind.”