Brown Baby (out from 20 Jan)Writer Nikesh Shukla, editor of the bestselling Good Immigrant anthology, hosts this new series about raising children “with joy and wonder” in difficult times, ahead of the release of his own family-themed memoir. Guests include singer Jay Sean, primetime cookery queen Nadiya Hussain, comedian Josie Long and TV legend Meera Syal, who reflects on her own upbringing as the daughter of Punjab-born parents who embraced her creativity, and how her children’s lives have been both similar and different to her own. A warm and highly listenable show. Hannah J Davies Even the Rich: Paris Hilton Season two of Wondery’s gossip-packed podcast focuses on the woman who has the dubious title of “America’s first influencer”: Paris Hilton. Divisive though she is, the story of how Hilton made $300 million by tempting the tabloids, flashing her thong and living in a hotel is pretty impressive. Brooke Siffrinn and Aricia Skidmore-Williams are the perfect hosts, bringing a dose of fun, scandal and commentary to Hilton’s family tree, where the women were powered by the mantra that Paris rebelled against: “Marry rich and have lots of babies.” Hannah Verdier Chosen by Hannah Moore For designer Henry Holland there is no such thing as a fashion faux pas – each outfit tells a story, and the more outrageous, the better. “[Clothes] are like my photo albums,” he tells Alexa Chung in episode one of this engaging, nostalgia-fuelled flip through the fashion moments that made his celebrity guests, from Chung’s haphazardly gaffer-taped vintage dresses and sweatshirts on Popworld, to Eve debuting the Chanel ombre shades and Swarovski tattoos that became a signature of mid 00s R&B style (“Mix your Gap with your Gucci,” the rapper advises). Holland began his career as a fashion editor at teen magazines like Smash Hits, before founding the House Of Holland brand (now sadly defunct), and he brings a combination of journalistic rigour, cheekiness and industry insight to interviews with stars including Beth Ditto, Pixie Geldof and the designer Paul Smith – several of whom became friends of Holland’s during the Myspace era, when his ‘nu-rave’ slogan T-shirts made him an international superstar. There’s plenty of celebrity gossip, of course (listen out for the tale about Karl Lagerfeld’s obsessive iPod collection), as well as genuine insight from those who’ve shaped what we wear, like Clueless costume designer Mona May. “I have a real emotional attachment to clothes,” says Chung, as she explains why she saves even the shoddiest items in her wardrobe. “Even if they’re just from Topshop, and I know they have no ‘value’ necessarily. To me they’re precious treasure. They’re just as important as diary entries.” The Ugandan musician turned presidential hopeful Bobi Wine is the subject of a new Spotify series, The Messenger. The series explores the 38-year-old’s youth-powered rise, as he attempts to succeed Yoweri Museveni, who has been in power for 34 years. The Guardian’s Today in Focus podcast also looked into Wine’s campaign this week, in an episode featuring Ugandan journalist Samuel Okiror. Why not try: Power – The Maxwells | Into The Grey Zone | The Travel Diaries