Lives are being put at risk and the care of patients disrupted by a spate of hospital incursions from Covid-19 deniers whose online activity is channelling hatred against NHS staff, say healthcare and police chiefs. In the latest example of a growing trend, a group of people were ejected by security from a Covid-19 ward last week as one of them filmed staff, claimed that the virus was a hoax and demanded that a seriously ill patient be sent home “He will die if he is taken from from here,” a consultant tells the man on footage, which was later shared on social media. Following contact by the Guardian, Facebook took down footage and other shocking posts in which conspiracy theorists described NHS staff as “ventilator killers”. However, footage filmed at the hospital continues to be uploaded and shared online. Police on Wednesday said they were appealing for the public’s help in finding a 45-year-old man from Kent in connection with the latest incident, which took place at East Surrey hospital. Distress was being caused due to “escalating abusive and threatening comments on social media targeting staff”, the force said. In the footage, a man behind the camera remonstrates with a consultant, who tells him that a patient will die if his oxygen tube is removed. When asked about what treatment is being given, the consultant explains that the patient has coronavirus pneumonia affecting both of lungs and is being treated with steroids and antibiotics. The man behind the camera says that patient should be brought home and the treatment replaced with vitamin C, vitamin D and zinc, but is told by the consultant: “None of those are proven treatments for coronavirus.” Since New Year’s Eve, when hundreds turned up outside St Thomas’ hospital in London, conspiracy theorists have stalked the wards of as many as a dozen hospitals to gather footage, which has been shared on social media. Fines have been issued or arrests made in the cases of at least seven people. The Doctors’ Association UK (DAUK), a union representing frontline medics, said it was unacceptable that staff working themselves into the ground to keep patients safe were having to worry about a new threat from Covid deniers and anti-maskers. It said Twitter and Facebook had a responsibility to ensure those breaking into hospitals to film footage were not given a platform. “Staff are exhausted and are running on fumes. They should not be having to deal with abuse and even death threats on social media,” said Dr Samantha Batt-Rawden, the president of the DAUK. “Nor should they be worried about turning up for their shift due to crowds of people chanting ‘Covid is a hoax’ outside hospitals full of patients who are sick and dying. This is decimating morale, but worse still, could be obstructing patient care.” The incident at East Surrey hospital, where police issued fines and warnings and continue to investigate what they described as an “escalation” on social media, comes after the arrests earlier this month of four men allegedly filming inside hospitals in the West Midlands and Worcestershire, and of a woman in Gloucestershire. Security officers also removed apparent coronavirus deniers taking pictures of empty corridors at Colchester hospital, where the intensive care unit is at maximum capacity, while a woman was also fined in the first use of specific Covid-19 powers after social media posts claiming parts of a Hampshire hospital were empty. Hillingdon hospital and Croydon hospitals have also been targeted by intruders filming. Chris Hopson, the chief executive of NHS Providers, which represents trusts in England, said the incursion was risky both to patients and staff. “Trust leaders are concerned about the recent activities of Covid deniers ranging filming empty areas at night-time and protesting outside hospitals,” he said. “Entering a Covid ward, putting patient and staff lives at risk and then posting a video online afterwards plumbs new lows. It’s not only dangerous, it’s also deeply disrespectful of the extraordinary efforts by frontline NHS staff who, day in, day out are working flat out to save the lives of seriously ill patients. “NHS trusts take the security and safety of their staff, patients and visitors incredibly seriously and trust leaders have told us they have been reviewing security arrangements to ensure that appropriate protections are in place.” Michael Wilson, the chief executive of Surrey and Sussex healthcare NHS trust, where the latest known incident occurred last week, said: “Any suggestion that Covid-19 doesn’t exist or isn’t serious is not only extremely disrespectful to the NHS staff caring for patients affected by the virus, but it also puts the lives of others at risk.” The incidents at hospitals and their aftermath on social media were described by the Centre for Countering Digital Hate (CCDH) as “a new phase in the weaponisation of misinformation”. “It is incredibly worrying that individuals radicalised on social media using misinformation and conspiracy theories are now being mobilised to take actions that directly put lives at risk and targets medical professionals,” said Imran Ahmed, the chief executive of the NGO, which works to counter online hate speech. Facebook said it had taken down posts flagged by the Guardian and disabled multiple accounts. A spokesperson said: “We remove Covid-19 misinformation that could lead to imminent physical harm, including false information about approved vaccines and treatments.” The company said it had removed millions of pieces of content of that type and was working with fact-checking organisations. East Surrey police said East Surrey hospital called them on Saturday about social media posts that included videos and abusive comments made towards hospital staff. They were related to the incident on Thursday when police were called following reports that a number of people had gained access to the critical care ward to visit a family member and were not wearing masks, had abused staff and refused to leave. Two people were fined for breaching Covid-19 restrictions, and a breach of the peace warning led to the group leaving. On Wednesday Surrey police said Tobe Hayden Leigh, 45, of Maidstone, Kent, was wanted in relation to subsequent social media posts. DCI Kimball Edey said: “We would like to speak to Hayden Leigh in connection with this incident, and the escalating abusive and threatening comments being made towards hospital staff on social media. These comments are extremely concerning, and are obviously causing considerable distress for those who are being targeted. “The staff at the hospital, as are all NHS workers, are trying to care for desperately ill people in extremely challenging circumstances, and to be targeted and abused on social media in this way is simply unacceptable.” Police said they also needed to locate Hayden-Leigh due to the public health risk he poseed after being in close proximity with a patient who remained seriously ill with Covid.