Emmanuel Macron has said Europe will not block or ban exports of coronavirus vaccines but that they should be “controlled”, accusing AstraZeneca of a lack of transparency after the British-Swedish pharmaceutical company said it could not fulfil the whole of its contract with the EU. In an interview with the Guardian and a small group of other media, the French president insisted it was in everyone’s interest for all countries to have access to vaccines. He also said the AstraZeneca vaccine, given approval by the EU regulator on Friday for use on all adults, appeared to be “quasi-ineffective” on people older than 65, though he acknowledged he had no figures or official information. Last week AstraZeneca enraged EU officials by announcing that only 25% of the deliveries would be possible in the first quarter of 2021, owing to production problems at the Belgian plant, and that it could not make good on the shortages by importing from the UK. “Imagine the hypothesis that the British finish their vaccine campaign with success, what will they do? Stop European lorries from entering, when there is a total dependence on the continent. Bon courage [good luck]!” Macron said. “And imagine the hypothesis that France, Italy, Germany have a vaccine strategy that is extremely ambitious and rapid. It will quickly fail if our neighbours don’t have the same vaccine strategy because our economies are integrated. France has 500,000 trans-border workers. So all this will only work if we do it together.” Speaking at the Elysée, Macron said: “Vaccine exports should be controlled, not blocked or banned, which would make no sense because we are also dependent on non-European production. “It should be controlled because there is questionable behaviour and we will be receiving fewer deliveries that do not honour the contractual engagements agreed.” He added that Europe’s response to the contractual failure “will be proportional”. “But we cannot have contractual agreements made with laboratories then reviewed because of pressure from one or other countries. The situation with vaccines is unusual, but I believe strongly in the benefits of cooperation. “AstraZeneca is a major laboratory that has its base in the UK, but which is also very present in France and Europe. There is no benefit to having a strategy of non-cooperation. “There has been a lack of transparency in the lack of information given, particularly from AstraZeneca … we have doubts and we want to be sure that if a company is not able to honour its contract, it’s not because it has over-delivered elsewhere. And that’s why cooperation is so important.” The European Medicines Agency authorised the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine for use in all adult age groups on Friday, after German authorities had earlier recommended that its use be limited to people under 65 due to a lack of a data about efficacy in older groups. The vaccine’s developers and regulators in the UK have strongly defended its efficacy in all groups. Going further than German authorities, who had assessed only that efficacy had not yet been demonstrated for over-65s, Macron suggested the vaccine was less useful in the immediate crisis at hand. “We have to be realistic: the real problem with the AstraZeneca vaccine is that it doesn’t work in the way we expected,” Macron said. “We have very little information … but all the indications today are that it is quasi-ineffective for those over 65 years old. “Our vaccine strategy is to inoculate health workers and the elderly because it is they who have the most serious symptoms. Today, when I look at our hospitals, 80% of the patients [with Covid-19] are over 65 years old, and two thirds of those in intensive care are over 65. “The [AstraZeneca] vaccine is no doubt superb in the long term and it will be useful, but it’s not exactly what we need now.” In further critical remarks, Macron added: “AstraZeneca is not a vaccine-producing company. I have a lot of respect for the researchers who have tried to participate in the collective effort, they have done great research at Oxford, but they clearly have problems with the development as we have seen. We hope it can be improved.” Macron said it was not his role to question other countries’ vaccination policies, but did suggest the British government was playing fast and loose with the science by extending the period between the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine doses to 12 weeks. “When you read all the health notices, when even the producers say that for it to work there has to be two injections, which is the case with the Pfizer, when you listen to the scientists … I’m not sure you can say you are vaccinated when you have had the first injection of a vaccine that needs two,” he said. “If, and I say ‘if’ because I don’t have the figures, you inoculate the over-65s with the AstraZeneca vaccine and if, as I have heard it may be only around 10% effective, then your figures make no sense. What I do know because it is established is that if you give two injections of the Pfizer/BioNTech 28 days apart then you are covered at 90%.” Macron appeared to be referring to an article in the Germany business paper Handelsblatt, which claimed the rate was only 8% in over-65s. The report has been widely challenged as incorrect, including by the German health ministry, which suggested it had mixed up the efficacy rate for over-65s with the proportion of older people involved in AstraZeneca’s trials. He added: “We have to find a balance. I am not in favour of abandoning all precautions. We have to rely on good science. If we have vaccine programmes that don’t respect the science, that’s a problem for me because it’s putting our citizens in possible danger.” Chris Whitty, the UK’s chief medical officer, has said delaying the second dose was a “public health decision” based on the best advice and balance of risks. But the move has proved controversial: while there is evidence from trials that a 12-week gap does not reduce the efficacy of the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine, Pfizer has stressed it has no data on whether protection after the first dose is sustained after three weeks. Asked about the cross-Channel blame game over not just vaccines, but Brexit and coronavirus controls, in which he is often personally named, Macron laughed off the personal attacks: “Whenever there’s a problem with the EU, the British just love to detest the French – and me – and say we are responsible. I have accepted this role. Sometimes when there are tensions, I ask ‘Why me’, it is perhaps making me out to be more important than I am!” On a more serious note, he added: “I like your country a lot, but as I have already said, I think Brexit is an error. I respect the sovereignty of the people and the people voted so it had to be done, but I think that vote was based on a lot of lies and now we see it has made things much more difficult in many ways.”