An emergency refugee camp erected on the Aegean island of Lesbos is a potential health hazard for thousands of asylum seekers and aid workers because the site has been contaminated by lead poisoning, according to Human Rights Watch. The US-based group urged Athens’ centre-right government to release further details of the tests it has conducted at the facility, which was formerly a military installation. In a statement deploring the lack of transparency with which the issue has been handled, the organisation’s senior crisis and conflict researcher, Belkis Willie, said: “The Greek government knowingly built a migrant camp on a firing range and then turned a blind eye to the potential health risks for residents and workers there. After weeks of prodding, it took soil samples to test for lead contamination while denying that a risk of lead exposure existed.” Seven weeks elapsed before the administration released the results, she said. “And [it] has yet to allow independent experts to analyse them or vow to take the necessary steps to protect residents and workers and inform them about the potential health risks.” The group said it was incumbent on Greek authorities, who so far have shared the findings only with the EU, to divulge more details including the levels of lead and the exact locations where soil samples were extracted. According to the United Nations’ refugee agency, the UNHCR, 7,165 men, women and children live in the Mavrovouni camp, a rudimentary facility of tents overlooking the sea. It was constructed in a matter of days after fires gutted Moria, the island’s holding centre, displacing about 12,500 people overnight. Since the blazes, more than 5,000 asylum seekers have been transferred to the mainland. Sounding the alarm in November, Human Rights Watch said authorities had failed to carry out comprehensive lead testing or soil remediation before moving migrants to the EU-funded temporary site, which was a firing range from 1926. It said unexploded mortar projectiles and live small arms ammunition capable of causing death or injury “if disturbed or handled” had been found by refugees, suggesting the camp had failed to be properly cleared. “Young children and women of reproductive age are most at risk from negative effects from lead exposure,” the organisation said. Lesbos, which faces Turkey, Greece’s longtime Nato rival, is the country’s third largest island and home to a permanent mechanised infantry division, which regularly conducts combat training exercises. Munitions on firing ranges are a common source of soil contamination. Responding to the claims, Athens’ migration ministry said the camp extended across an area of 341,000 sq metres, and only about 21,000 sq metres had ever been used as a shooting range. But it admitted over the weekend that out of 12 soil samples taken from the site, one “had lead levels that exceeded the acceptable limit”. In light of the findings, it pledged to bring in new soil and gravel and construct a cement base under larger tents, known as rub halls, and administrative and registration areas “that will further eliminate risk”. It said: “So far, we are confident that our detailed evaluation of lead presence in the camp has not revealed levels that require special intervention or the revision of the construction plan. Onsite community engagement to reassure both refugees and workers will also be conducted.” An EU-funded project to build a state-of-the art reception centre that would replace Mavrovouni is under way, the ministry announced. Plans for the new camp have met with fierce resistance from locals, who are also opposed to the temporary facility, erected within miles of Mytilene, the island’s port town. Stratis Kitelis, the town’s mayor, said the tent city was not only “totally inappropriate” but ill-prepared to endure a harsh winter during which the Aegean outpost has been lashed by gale-force winds and rain and endured freezing temperatures in recent days. Lesbos has long been on the frontline of the refugee crisis, with close to a million Europe-bound Syrians traversing the island in 2015 alone, after making treacherous sea crossings from Turkey. Last year arrivals across Greece dropped by almost 80%, according to the UNHCR, after Athens, with backing from the EU, sought to reinforce its land and sea borders.