A fifth vaccine, made by the US company Johnson & Johnson, has shown efficacy against the coronavirus, giving complete protection against hospitalisation and death, and could transform prospects for protecting both the UK and the rest of the world, because it needs only a single dose. The vaccine, made by the US giant’s subsidiary Janssen, based in Belgium, was trialled with 44,000 people in the US, South Africa and Brazil. The US has ordered 100m doses with an option for more. Further trials involving a second dose are taking place in the UK – and the British government has bought 30m doses. The EU has ordered 400m doses. The company could not say what the timetable for supply would be, assuming regulators approve it. In the US, the vaccine had 72% efficacy in preventing mild to moderate cases of Covid but a lower rate of 66% was observed globally in the large trial conducted across three continents and against multiple variants. It gave people 85% protection against severe illness, even in South Africa which is struggling with a problematic variant of the virus. The vaccine gave 100% protection against hospitalisation and death, as do the other vaccines now approved in the US and Europe. The vaccine is one of six backed by Operation Warp Speed in the US. Dr Anthony Fauci, director for the National Institute for Allergy and Infectious Disease and in charge of the US response to Covid under the Biden administration, said it was an “absolutely spectacular result”. Because of the need for only one shot, it would be easier to protect large populations. The way to end the global pandemic was “to vaccinate as many people as quickly as we can to prevent the virus replicating”, he said. There could be “a messaging challenge” in the US, however, he said, because people might assume the Moderna and Pfizer/BioNTech vaccines, which have around 95% efficacy, were better. But the real importance was that the vaccine would prevent hospitalisation and death in the US and around the world. The results showed that the protection did not vary across age groups, and was as strong in the over-60s, who are at highest risk from Covid and made up about a third of the participants, as in younger people. It also did not vary between groups of different ethnicities. “We have a vaccine that works in all ages and does the critical function of keeping people out of hospital,” said Operation Warp Speed’s Covid-19 response vaccine lead, Matt Hepburn, at a briefing on the results. “We also have a vaccine where, frankly, small is beautiful.” he said. The vaccine needs only one shot and can be stored and transported at fridge temperatures of 2C to 8C, unlike the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines. Janssen has agreed in principle to supply up to 500m doses to Covax, the UN initiative to get vaccines to lower-income countries. It is the second biggest order for Covax after the AstraZeneca vaccine. The company said it had been investing heavily in new factories around the world to have the capacity to manufacture 1bn doses this year. “The potential to significantly reduce the burden of severe disease, by providing an effective and well-tolerated vaccine with just one immunisation, is a critical component of the global public health response,” said Paul Stoffels, chief scientific officer of Johnson & Johnson. “A one-shot vaccine is considered by the World Health Organization to be the best option in pandemic settings, enhancing access, distribution and compliance … 85% efficacy in preventing severe Covid-19 disease and prevention of Covid-19-related medical interventions will potentially protect hundreds of millions of people from serious and fatal outcomes of Covid-19. It also offers the hope of helping ease the huge burden placed on healthcare systems and communities.” The vaccine is based on a J&J vaccine successfully used against Ebola. It is similar to the Oxford/AstraZeneca design, which has not yet been approved in the US, but delivers a protein from the spike of the coronavirus through a human common cold rather than chimp adenovirus. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in the US and the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency in the UK have already been looking at the early data. J&J said it would be filing for emergency authorisation in the US, Europe and the UK next week. . The US has an agreement to buy 100m doses of J&J’s vaccine for $1bn (£730m). The company said in a statement the vaccine would be ready immediately upon emergency approval but declined to specify how many doses. The US government also has the option of purchasing an additional 200m doses. Three vaccines have so far been authorised by various regulators around the world: those from Pfizer/BioNTech, Moderna and Oxford/AstraZeneca. The European Medicines Agency approved the Oxford vaccine on Friday. A fourth vaccine, from Novavax, published results from last-stage trials on Thursday and will also now go forward for approval.