Ryanair said it expects to lose 95% of its traffic in February and March, with few if any flights operating from the UK and Ireland, due to the latest Covid lockdowns and travel restrictions. The Dublin-based carrier, which normally carries the most passengers in Europe, hit out at “brutal lockdowns” and called on the Irish government in particular to accelerate vaccinations. Ireland has banned incoming travel from Britain until Friday, and from Saturday is expected to require all international arrivals to provide a negative Covid-19 test from within the previous 72 hours to enter the country. The UK is considering a similar testing measure. Ryanair said it was again cutting its full year traffic forecast by a further 5m passengers to between 26m and 30m, at best below 20% of 2019 levels. It expects to fly fewer than 1.25m passengers in January and 500,000 in February and March, when it would usually see around 10m per month. It said it would significantly cut flight schedules from 21 Jan so that there would be “few, if any” flights to or from Ireland or the UK “until such time as these draconian travel restrictions are removed”. The low-cost carrier last week warned it would post its first annual loss since 2009, when the financial crisis struck. It said the cancellations would not further affect its results as the flights would have been largely loss-making. Ryanair called on the Irish and UK governments to accelerate vaccination programmes, contrasting in particular Ireland’s current vaccination rate with other countries. An airline spokesperson said: “The WHO (World Health Organization) have previously confirmed that governments should do everything possible to avoid brutal lockdowns. Ireland’s Covid-19 travel restrictions are already the most stringent in Europe, and so these new flight restrictions are inexplicable and ineffective when Ireland continues to operate an open border between the Republic and the north of Ireland.” The WHO’s guidance in fact states that lockdowns can slow Covid‑19 transmission and while it warns that “such measures disproportionately affect disadvantaged groups, including people in poverty, migrants, internally displaced people and refugees”, it says it recognises that “some countries have had no choice but to issue stay-at-home orders and other measures: and is “hopeful that countries will use targeted interventions where and when needed”. Ryanair added: “The fact that the Danish government, with a similar 5m population, has already vaccinated 10 times more citizens than Ireland shows that emergency action is needed to speed Covid vaccinations in Ireland.” The Irish airline has been advertising flights while highlighting the availability of vaccines, calling on customers to “jab and go” – a campaign that drew more than 1,600 complaints according to the Advertising Standards Authority, which is investigating. Ryanair said that all customers affected by further flight cancellations and restrictions would be emailed today to advise them of free rebooking or refunds. It has previously not offered to refund passengers when flights operated, regardless of lockdown rules. EasyJet, which carried most UK passengers pre-Covid, said on Monday it would be reviewing its schedules and likely operating only domestic and limited international flights while lockdown lasts. Meanwhile, Hungarian airline Wizz Air said it was cancelling flights as a result of the latest lockdown. Capacity in January is expected to fall to 25% of 2020 levels from the 35% level it flew in December.