From 4.30am on Thursday, and for up to 28 of the following 42 days, England’s cricketers will be beamed back into our living rooms for a regular helping of sunshine and theatre in the darkness of the UK’s winter lockdown. It begins with two Tests against Sri Lanka and a chance to be transported to Galle. The ramparts of the stadium’s neighbouring Dutch fort should be free from the invasion of St George’s flags this time and along with the glistening Indian Ocean, it will provide welcome reassurance as one of the sport’s most-loved backdrops. There may well be locals perched on the ramparts, but those in the ground will be limited to venue staff, players, coaches, officials and TV personnel. Visa and logistical issues mean Test Match Special and the written press will be relying on the pictures at home, with Sky’s roster of commentators likely to be similarly caffeine-reliant when providing their analysis from chilly Isleworth. All this makes for a situation far more pared back than the bubbles at the Rose Bowl and Old Trafford. It will ask plenty of the players, too, with both sides having had to steal themselves after tricky times in South Africa of late; Sri Lanka were beset with injuries during a Test series that ended in 2-0 defeat this month, while England were riddled with Covid-related anxiety that led to an ODI series being scuttled before Christmas. From afar, England appear to have not freaked out about the virus being present in the camp this time following Moeen Ali’s positive result upon arrival. With an intense two-month tour of India to follow, it is just as well. Moeen’s symptoms have thankfully been mild, his teammates always have his back and a running theme of their regular Zoom chats in the past week has been how lucky they all feel to be there. “To be able to watch live sport has been a real saviour in such tough times,” said Jos Buttler, vice-captain in the absence of the preemptively rested Ben Stokes. “We are all quite aware how lucky we are – even in very strange and different circumstances – to put cricket on the TV for people who love watching it at home.” In a series that will probably be dominated by spin – and notionally counts towards the World Test Championship, albeit with only England still in with a mathematical chance of reaching the final – Buttler’s performances will be one of many storylines to occupy minds, fuel debate and stave off some of the lockdown blues. Now at a prime age of 30, Buttler is Joe Root’s first-choice wicketkeeper but knows that while his batting is starting to find a solid Test tempo – and he was a source of valuable runs during the 3-0 win here in 2018 – his glove-work will be tested like never before. He will be predominantly up to the stumps, the heat will be sapping and chances will be at a premium. With Ben Foakes the understudy on the island where his silken hands and batting excelled two years ago, there is extra pressure. “He is a fantastic player and was man of the series last time in Sri Lanka,” said Buttler. “Someone like Foakesy is a great person to push my game on. I’ve watched him practise and he’s impressive to watch. “Competition for places is healthy. It can drive people on and give people hunger to improve and perform. That has always been the hallmark of good sides, good players on the fringes and good players missing out. “It’s demanding but it is also an exciting place to keep wicket. Up to the stumps, the ball is turning, you know you’re really in the game. It’s a bit like keeping in England to Broad and Anderson when it is nipping around. The ball is going to come to you. “All your kits and your helmet, the heat – it’s tiring. Your kit gets heavy but any time a chance comes along, you need to take it for your team.” Foakes should get his chance in India when Buttler misses the last two Tests to rest. Buttler appears at ease about this given the schedule this year, praising the set-up for being proactive on the issue of workloads and burnout. “The selectors, coaches and captains have spoken about it not being ideal missing games for England,” he said. “No one likes to do that, because you don’t know exactly when you might get another one, but it has been very forward-thinking from the ECB in an incredibly challenging year.” Others get an opportunity early and there will be much intrigue about how Jonny Bairstow fares on his return, slated to bat at No 3 while Rory Burns is on paternity leave, as well as the development of Zak Crawley and a possible debutant at No 5 in Essex’s Dan Lawrence. Mark Wood’s pace may have a chance to shine with Jofra Archer afforded down time, while a big challenge awaits the spinners too, with Dom Bess and Jack Leach reunited. The former left Somerset for Yorkshire at the end of a season as England’s No 1; the latter returns after two first-class outings in the past year. Sri Lanka remains verdant talent-wise, with leg-spinner Wanindu Hasaranga the latest threat. Though they sit sixth in the Test rankings to England’s fourth – and were ill-suited to South Africa’s bouncy surfaces – their head coach, Mickey Arthur, and captain, Dimuth Karunaratne, have been talking up a return to home comforts, as well Dinesh Chandimal and Angelo Mathews coming back from injuries to bolster the batting. Preparation time has been minimal and players on both sides must be afforded some leeway given the unique circumstances thrust upon them. But provided the skies remain free from rain clouds, we should receive a welcome distraction from events outside.