What were you hoping for?To meet someone interesting and enjoy a slice of normality in the sea of crazy that is the world at the moment. First impressions?Wonderful smile and easy to chat to. What did you talk about?My geeky hobby of model painting, contemporary dance, what we do for a living, lockdown survival tactics. Any awkward moments?Steph asked about my car (a Nissan Juke). I tried to show her, except it was too dark and then the connection was lost. Good table manners?She ordered her housemate a takeaway as well, so that deserves a high score. Best thing about Steph?She was really inquisitive, and was honest and open in return. I think we both overshared for a blind date, but equally, so it wasn’t awkward. Would you introduce her to your friends?Yes, I’m sure she’d find them interesting. Describe Steph in three wordsInquisitive, empathic and spirited. What do you think she made of you?Steph said she wanted to meet someone quirky, which is an accurate description of me. I think she would have seen me as the good kind of quirky. Any connection issues?A few moments, one caused by me stumbling out of wifi range. And… did you swap numbers?Yes. How did the call end?We both had work in the morning, so we chatted about that, then swapped numbers and waved goodbye. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I would make sure that my Just Eat account wasn’t linked to my work number. Marks out of 10?8. I didn’t feel that mysterious connection. However, I had a good time and Steph was a fabulous date. Would you meet again?Yes, Steph was really different from me and that is refreshing. Blind date is Guardian Weekend magazine’s dating column: every week, two strangers are paired up for dinner and drinks, and then spill the beans to us, answering a set of questions. This runs, with a photograph we take of each dater before the date, in Guardian Weekend magazine (in the UK) and online at theguardian.com every Saturday. It’s been running since 2009 – you can read all about how we put it together here.What questions will I be asked?We ask about age, location, occupation, hobbies, interests and the type of person you are looking to meet. If you do not think these questions cover everything you would like to know, tell us what’s on your mind. Can I choose who I match with?No, it’s a blind date! But we do ask you a bit about your interests, preferences, etc – the more you tell us, the better the match is likely to be. Can I pick the photograph?No, but don't worry: we'll choose the nicest ones. What personal details will appear?Your first name, job and age. How should I answer?Honestly but respectfully. Be mindful of how it will read to your date, and that Blind date reaches a large audience, in print and online. Will I see the other person’s answers?No. We may edit yours and theirs for a range of reasons, including length, and we may ask you for more details. Will you find me The One?We’ll try! Marriage! Babies! Can I do it in my home town?Only if it’s in the UK. Many of our applicants live in London, but we would love to hear from people living elsewhere. How to applyEmail blind.date@theguardian.com What were you hoping for?A face like Eddie Redmayne, a brain like Chris Whitty and a personality like Louis Theroux. First impressions?Smartly dressed, with a friendly face. What did you talk about?Hobbies, jobs, philosophy, history and podcasts. Matt educated me on different types of dance music and how eating Haribo is a sure way to last until the early hours when raving. Any awkward moments?I misunderstood what he meant when he said he does “modelling” – I was expecting to see his portfolio, not a glass cabinet of painted figurines. Good table manners?Very! He kindly waited until my food had arrived before tucking in. Best thing about Matt?He was talkative and open. Plus incredibly knowledgeable about water reservoirs and now I am, too. Would you introduce him to your friends?I’m not sure they’d have much in common. Describe Matt in three wordsPolite, intelligent and quirky. What do you think he made of you?Probably pretty nosy and intense, but hopefully friendly. Any connection issues?Only when he took the laptop outside to show me his car, after he had tried and failed to find his headtorch, so I couldn’t see it… or Matt. And... did you swap numbers?We did. How did the call end?Matt said, “Well, I wasn’t anticipating talking about that on the first date” and I realised my questions were getting a bit intense. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I’d have refrained from getting out my lockdown purchase and doing an amateur tarot card reading for Matt. He couldn’t figure out if I was being serious, and neither could I. Marks out of 10?6 – Matt was lovely, but I think we’re very different people. Would you meet again?Based on the cards, our futures don’t align. • Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com