Indonesian rescuers have pulled body parts, clothing and scraps of metal from the Java Sea on Sunday morning, a day after a Boeing 737-500 with 62 people onboard crashed shortly after takeoff from Jakarta, officials said. Officials were hopeful they were homing in on the wreckage of Sriwijaya Air Flight 182 after sonar equipment detected a signal from the aircraft. Transportation minister Budi Karya Sumadi said authorities had launched massive search efforts after identifying “the possible location of the crash site”. “These pieces were found by the SAR [search and rescue] team between Lancang Island and Laki Island,” said Bagus Puruhito from the National Search and Rescue agency in a statement. Indonesia’s Air Chief Marshal, Hadi Tjahjanto, said teams on the Rigel navy ship equipped with a remote-operated vehicle had detected a signal from the aircraft, which fitted the coordinates from the last contact made by the pilots before the plane went missing. “We have immediately deployed our divers from navy’s elite unit to determine the finding to evacuate the victims,” Tjahjanto said. More than 12 hours after the Boeing plane operated by the Indonesian airline lost contact, little is known about what caused the crash. Fishermen in the area around Thousand Islands, a chain of islands north of Jakarta’s coast, reported hearing an explosion around 2.30pm on Saturday. “We heard something explode, we thought it was a bomb or a tsunami since after that we saw the big splash from the water,” fisherman Solihin, who goes by one name, told the Associated Press by phone. “It was raining heavily and the weather was so bad. So it is difficult to see around clearly. But we can see the splash and a big wave after the sounds. We were very shocked and directly saw the plane debris and the fuel around our boat.” Sumadi said Flight SJ182 was delayed for an hour before it took off at 2.36pm. It disappeared from radar four minutes later, after the pilot contacted air traffic control to ascend to an altitude of 29,000ft (8,839 metres), he said. There were 62 people on board, including seven children and three babies. “We are aware of media reports from Jakarta regarding Sriwijaya Air flight SJ-182,” Boeing said in a statement. “Our thoughts are with the crew, passengers, and their families. We are in contact with our airline customer and stand ready to support them during this difficult time.” Authorities established two crisis centres, one at the airport and one at a port. Families gathered to wait for news of loved ones. On social media, people began circulating the flight manifesto with photos and videos of those who were listed as passengers. One video shows a woman with her children waving goodbye while walking through the airport. Sriwijaya Air’s president, Jefferson Irwin Jauwena, said the plane, which was 26 years old and had previously been used by airlines in the United States, was airworthy. He told reporters on Saturday that the plane had previously flown to Pontianak and Pangkal Pinang city on the same day. Indonesia, the world’s largest archipelago nation, with more than 260 million people, has been plagued by transportation accidents on land, sea and air because of overcrowding on ferries, ageing infrastructure and poorly enforced safety standards. In October 2018, a Boeing 737 Max 8 jet operated by Lion Air plunged into the Java Sea just minutes after taking off from Jakarta, killing all 189 people on board. The plane involved in Saturday’s incident did not have the automated flight-control system that played a role in the Lion Air crash and another crash of a 737 Max 8 jet in Ethiopia five months later, leading to the grounding of the Max 8 for 20 months. The Lion Air crash was Indonesia’s worst airline disaster since 1997, when 234 people were killed on a Garuda airlines flight near Medan on Sumatra island. In December 2014, an AirAsia flight from the Indonesian city of Surabaya to Singapore plunged into the sea, killing 162 people. Sriwijaya Air has only has several minor incidents in the past, though a farmer was killed in 2008 when plane went off the runway while landing due to a hydraulic issue.