Donald Trump tells the rioters: “Remember this day forever!” (American carnage: how Trump’s footsoldiers ran riot in the Capitol, 7 January). That’s exactly the danger. America’s 6 January 2021 recalls France’s 6 February 1934. That day, rightwing crowds, fuelled by antisemitic fantasies and fascist myths, tried to storm the Assemblée Nationale and overthrow parliamentary democracy. They were beaten off (16 people died), but they remembered that day as a moment of patriotic sacrifice, and the boast that “I was there on 6 February” inspired the ultra-right collaborators in the murderous Milice, who hunted down resisters and Jews during the Nazi occupation a few years later. Now the “veterans” of 6 January in Washington will treasure their memories and wait for their hour to return. Trumpism goes underground, distilling its venom.Neal Ascherson London • In 1935, the Nobel literature prize winner Sinclair Lewis published It Can’t Happen Here in response to the fascist threats he saw in the US and elsewhere at that time. This week’s horrifying events at the US Capitol and the conduct of Donald Trump over the past four years are chillingly similar to what Lewis describes in his novel about what happens to the US when a populist candidate is elected president. It is well worth a read: it considers different responses to the growing threat as well as the unwillingness of some individuals to acknowledge what is happening all around them, and the terrible cost to people and society when a blind eye is turned to thuggery and bullying.Stephanie GarrettWelwyn Garden City, Hertfordshire • Following the mob violence in Washington DC, it is welcome to read the almost universal condemnation from around the world. I would like to suggest a practical way for organisations, politicians and individuals in the UK to further express their disgust at Donald Trump’s behaviour. All elected politicians and interested lawyers should explore every legal means of preventing him from travelling to the UK to visit his golf courses.Rose HarvieDumbarton, West Dunbartonshire • Commentators are asking if this is finally the end of Trumpism. I predict the opposite. Having deliberately split the Republican party, Trump will form his own. That it will split opposition to the Democratic party matters not a jot to him. He knows he can’t be president again. But he can command sufficient support to keep his ego massaged for the rest of his life.Patrick CosgroveBucknell, Shropshire • Donald Trump has no understanding of abstract concepts such as democracy or even truth; he only ever thinks of his own interests. So I imagine his shocking, inflammatory provocation of the crowd at the Capitol on Wednesday was a deliberate attempt to make federal and state prosecutors fearful of the possible consequences of bringing him to trial, after 20 January, for any of his alleged legal or financial misdemeanours.Matthew TaylorHove, East Sussex • It’s been a good year for Russia and China. Europe has been fragmented and weakened, and the US is a laughing stock and appears to be drifting into anarchy. Russia and China will undoubtedly now claim that autocracy is clearly the only successful form of government, as democracy doesn’t work.Roy BarrattBurton-on-Trent, Staffordshire