Fears that horses travelling to Britain from Ireland and France to compete at major racing festivals would be subject to refundable VAT charged at 19% of their value have receded after Willie Mullins’s mare Grangee, the likely favourite for a valuable bumper at Market Rasen on Saturday, entered the UK on Friday without any charge being levied. A report on Friday morning suggested that significant tax charges, which could have taken several months to reclaim, would be payable on all horses entering the country after 1 January, as a result of Britain’s exit from the European Union’s single market and customs union. However, Mullins was “pleasantly surprised” to find that this was not the case. “It’s a huge relief,” Ireland’s champion trainer said on Friday evening, “whether that’s for trainers travelling from Ireland to England or English trainers going the other way. “We’ve been hearing all sorts of stories and no one would tell us what was happening, so I said, “let’s load up a horse and go and see”, and we were pleasantly surprised. We are travelling on a temporary travel document because we are only going in for a race and out again, and with that, there are no VAT implications. “There’s a bit more red tape between the departments of agriculture on both sides, but once you have a good shipping agent that’s easy enough. It’s probably going to cost a little more but that’s bearable. It will be different if a horse is moving permanently, but that’s no different than it always was, and that applies when you sell a horse anywhere.” Mullins has sent a team of more than 50 horses to the Festival in five of the past six seasons and remains “hopeful” that his party will be at, or very close, to that level this year. “I don’t honestly know but I’m hopeful,” he said. “As far as I’m concerned, everything is still possible for Cheltenham as yet, I haven’t put together what’s going to go.” Grangee is top-priced at 33-1 for the Champion Bumper in March while her main market rival for Saturday’s race, Pam Sly’s Eileendover, is a 25-1 shot for the Festival.