José Mourinho has made his disappointment clear to three of his Tottenham players after they attended a party over the Christmas period in clear breach of strict tier 4 coronavirus regulations. A photograph that has circulated on social media shows Erik Lamela, Giovani Lo Celso and Sergio Reguilón – together with West Ham’s Manuel Lanzini – at the get-together. There are 15 adults in the shot, which is believed to have been taken on Christmas Eve or Christmas Day. West Ham are deeply unhappy with Lanzini, who came on as a substitute in their 1-0 win at Everton on Friday. They say the midfielder has tested negative for Covid since the picture was taken. Lamela was not in the Spurs squad for their 3-0 win over Leeds on Saturday despite having featured as a substitute in the past two matches – his first involvement after a near two-month injury lay-off – while Mourinho left Reguilon as an unused substitute. Lo Celso is out with a hamstring injury. Mourinho had said he bought Reguilon a special Christmas dinner as he believed the Spaniard, who signed from Real Madrid in September, would be alone. “An amazing gift, an amazing gift,” he said. “Portuguese piglet, which is amazing for Portuguese and Spanish [people]. So I gave him this because I was told he was going to spend Christmas on his own. “He was not alone as you could see and we, as a club, feel disappointed because we give the players all the education, all the conditions. We are not happy, it was a negative surprise for us.” Mourinho was asked whether he was angry and felt let down by the three players. “I prefer to say disappointed. We know what we are internally … we don’t need to open the door to you and let you know what is going on internally, what are going to be the consequences, how did we approach that negative surprise.” A Spurs spokesperson said: “We are extremely disappointed and strongly condemn this image showing some of our players with family and friends together at Christmas particularly as we know the sacrifices everybody around the country made to stay safe over the festive period. “The rules are clear, there are no exceptions, and we regularly remind all our players and staff about the latest protocols and their responsibilities to adhere and set an example. The matter will be dealt with internally.” West Ham said: “The club has set the highest possible standards with its protocols and measures relating to Covid-19 so we are disappointed to learn of Manuel Lanzini’s actions. The matter has been dealt with internally and Manuel has been strongly reminded of his responsibilities.” Lanzini apologised on Twitter for making a “bad mistake over Christmas”, adding: “I take full responsibility for my actions. I know people have made difficult sacrifices to stay safe and I should be setting a better example.” It is not the first time Spurs players have broken lockdown rules as there were several incidents during the first lockdown in the spring. José Mourinho was seen holding a personal training session with Tanguy Ndombele while Ryan Sessegnon and Davinson Sánchez were seen out running together. Serge Aurier was a repeat offender, having a haircut and a personal training session with Moussa Sissoko.