A US Capitol police officer has died of injuries suffered during the attack led by a pro-Trump mob, the force said in a statement late on Thursday. The officer, Brian Sicknick, had been with the US Capitol Police (USCP) since July 2008, and most recently served in the department’s first responders unit. Sicknick became the fifth person to die in the attacks. Among the four others killed was a demonstrator shot by authorities. Three died in what police called “medical emergencies”. Wednesday’s breach of the building came as Congress was certifying the victory of President-elect Joe Biden. “Officer Sicknick was responding to the riots … and was injured while physically engaging with protesters,” police said in a statement. He died on Thursday after being taken to hospital following his collapse upon returning to his divisional office, it added. Craig Sicknick, the officer’s brother, told the Daily Beast that he was left on a ventilator with a blood clot on the brain following the attack on the Capitol. Sicknick was a former Air National Guardsman who, according to his brother, served in Operation Desert Shield and Operation Enduring Freedom before joining the police force. He then became a critic of the Iraq war and the treatment of military veterans in letters sent to a local newspaper in New Jersey, according to tweets sent by Marcus Baram, an investigative journalist. The three people who died in “medical emergencies” have been named as Benjamin Philips, 50, from Pennsylvania; Kevin Greeson, 55, from Alabama and Rosanne Boyland, 34, from Georgia. Ashli Babbitt, 35, was the woman fatally shot by police as she attempted to climb through a broken window into the House chamber. Metropolitan homicide officials, along with the USCP and its federal partners, will investigate the death of Sicknick, police said. Democratic leaders of the House appropriations committee said the “tragic loss” of a Capitol police officer “should remind all of us of the bravery of the law enforcement officers who protected us, our colleagues, congressional staff, the press corps and other essential workers during the hours-long takeover of the Capitol by pro-Trump protesters”. More than 24 hours after he incited a mob to attack the US Capitol, Donald Trump urged an end to the violence and acknowledged there would be a new administration on 20 January. With Reuters and Associated Press