What were you hoping for?I run planet-friendly singles events in my spare time, setting other people up. I thought it was probably time to go on a date myself. First impressions?Friendly, sociable, great smile. What did you talk about?Cats, utilities (including water piping and electricity meters), plants, music, politics and sustainability. Any awkward moments?Takeaways don’t deliver where I am, so I had to watch him eat. He did let me pick what he ate, though. Good table manners?I was trying not to focus on how he was eating, to avoid making the me-not-eating thing too awkward. How long did you stay on the call?Four and a half hours. Best thing about Morgan?He was interested and interesting, super polite and (quite) charming. Would you introduce him to your friends?He’d definitely be a fun addition and could (probably) hold his own. Describe Morgan in three wordsSmart, cool, cat-obsessed. What do you think he made of you?He probably thought I was a little intense. I did ask him if he would sing to me at one point, and he refused. Fair play – I wouldn’t have done it, either. Any connection issues?I faked connection issues when it became clear he was a cat person. I’m more of a dog person myself. And... did you swap numbers?Apparently he doesn’t use WhatsApp (suspicious get-out strategy or genuine – who knows?). I did get some social media handles, though. How did the call end?We decided four and a half hours was definitely enough video call bonding for one evening. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?A tiny bit of singing from Morgan would have been the cherry on the cake. Marks out of 10?It was a really lovely date. I don’t want to rank because he doesn’t deserve less than a 10. Would you meet again in person?Sure, I’m in. He did mention a high-speed train up to London. Blind date is Guardian Weekend magazine’s dating column: every week, two strangers are paired up for dinner and drinks, and then spill the beans to us, answering a set of questions. This runs, with a photograph we take of each dater before the date, in Guardian Weekend magazine (in the UK) and online at theguardian.com every Saturday. It’s been running since 2009 – you can read all about how we put it together here.What questions will I be asked?We ask about age, location, occupation, hobbies, interests and the type of person you are looking to meet. If you do not think these questions cover everything you would like to know, tell us what’s on your mind. Can I choose who I match with?No, it’s a blind date! But we do ask you a bit about your interests, preferences, etc – the more you tell us, the better the match is likely to be. Can I pick the photograph?No, but don't worry: we'll choose the nicest ones. What personal details will appear?Your first name, job and age. How should I answer?Honestly but respectfully. Be mindful of how it will read to your date, and that Blind date reaches a large audience, in print and online. Will I see the other person’s answers?No. We may edit yours and theirs for a range of reasons, including length, and we may ask you for more details. Will you find me The One?We’ll try! Marriage! Babies! Can I do it in my home town?Only if it’s in the UK. Many of our applicants live in London, but we would love to hear from people living elsewhere. How to applyEmail blind.date@theguardian.com What were you hoping for?I’ve been single for around four months and I’m really enjoying it, so I wasn’t too worried about finding a relationship. I was excited to just enjoy the evening and see what happened. First impressions?Very bubbly with really pretty hair. What did you talk about?Politics, hobbies, our dreams for the future, the environment, where we’ve lived. Any awkward moments?It was a very smooth-flowing date from start to finish. Good table manners?When my takeaway finally arrived, I was four beers down, so I don’t think my manners were what they usually are. I had to have my earphones in, so the mic was quite close to my mouth, which couldn’t have been pleasant while I was eating. How long did you stay on the call?Four and a half hours, but the time flew by. Best thing about Hannah?I loved her enthusiasm for what she does and I really felt that she was interested in what I was saying. Would you introduce her to your friends?Yes, I would. Describe Hannah in three wordsFunny, engaging, bubbly. What do you think she made of you?I feel like she enjoyed my company. We had a lot of common interests. Any connection issues?It froze a couple of times. And... did you swap numbers?We didn’t, but we took each other’s Instagram. How did the call end?We thanked each other for a lovely date. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I’d like it to have been in person. Being flirty and having good eye contact is important in a date for me and it was hard to do that online. Marks out of 10?We promised not to score but I’m gonna say 10. Would you meet again in person?Yes – she seems a really great person. • Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com.