What were you hoping for? Someone chatty, attractive and funny. Ideally, a spark. First impressions? Handsome and funny. He was easy-going and despite feeling nervous, I instantly felt relaxed when we began to chat. What did you talk about? Our jobs, studies, families, live music and pizza places in Edinburgh. A bit about my time living in Spain and his time in Edinburgh. Any awkward moments? He noticed a subtle yawn from me towards the end. It was hard to know when to call it. Good table manners? Yes. His food arrived first, so he waited for mine to arrive. We took turns: one person spoke while the other ate. Best thing about Francesco?He made me laugh, and he’s a really interesting guy. He’s got an Italian accent, but came out with some very Scottish words, which was amusing but lovely. Would you introduce him to your friends? In a casual situation, probably. Describe Francesco in three words?Funny, chatty, polite. What do you think he made of you? Not sure – nice, I hope! Any connection issues? I froze once, but he could still hear me so I just reconnected. And... did you swap numbers? We did. We might go for ice-cream when normality resumes. How did the call end? It got late, I was tired, so we swapped numbers and called it. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be? Maybe order more exciting food than pizza, but we enjoyed it nonetheless. Marks out of 10? 7. Would you meet again?Yes, but maybe just as friends. It’s hard to tell if there is chemistry through a video call. Blind date is Guardian Weekend magazine’s dating column: every week, two strangers are paired up for dinner and drinks, and then spill the beans to us, answering a set of questions. This runs, with a photograph we take of each dater before the date, in Guardian Weekend magazine (in the UK) and online at theguardian.com every Saturday. It’s been running since 2009 – you can read all about how we put it together here.What questions will I be asked?We ask about age, location, occupation, hobbies, interests and the type of person you are looking to meet. If you do not think these questions cover everything you would like to know, tell us what’s on your mind. Can I choose who I match with?No, it’s a blind date! But we do ask you a bit about your interests, preferences, etc – the more you tell us, the better the match is likely to be. Can I pick the photograph?No, but don't worry: we'll choose the nicest ones. What personal details will appear?Your first name, job and age. How should I answer?Honestly but respectfully. Be mindful of how it will read to your date, and that Blind date reaches a large audience, in print and online. Will I see the other person’s answers?No. We may edit yours and theirs for a range of reasons, including length, and we may ask you for more details. Will you find me The One?We’ll try! Marriage! Babies! Can I do it in my home town?Only if it’s in the UK. Many of our applicants live in London, but we would love to hear from people living elsewhere. How to applyEmail blind.date@theguardian.com What were you hoping for? You never know what to expect from a blind date, and that’s the fun part. First impressions? She’s such a nice girl, with kind eyes. What did you talk about? Common interests, how our careers work in this new environment, upbringings, friends, series we like to watch, food we like to eat. Any awkward moments? The connection acted up sometimes, and we ended up speaking at the same moment, creating that, “No, please, you first” situation. Good table manners? We had pizza, which we both agreed had to be eaten with our hands. Best thing about Iona? She is passionate about what she wants to do. Would you introduce her to your friends? With time, we’ll see; my friends are a handful. Describe Iona in three words? Smart, passionate, kind. What do you think she made of you?That I might be arrogant sometimes; I don’t do it on purpose, though. Any connection issues?At times the video feed froze, but the audio kept going, so it was all fine. And...did you swap numbers? Yes. How did the call end? We were pretty tired, so decided to call it a night. We swapped numbers and closed the call. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be? I would try to sound less arrogant, and ask her more questions (and order another pizza for the morning after). Marks out of 10? 7. Would you meet again? Who knows what will happen? These are crazy times and we need to stay home for a while, so we’ll see. • Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com.