The Norwich manager, Daniel Farke, has insisted Emi Buendía will be staying at club after watching him produce another brilliant winner to see off Barnsley 1-0 at Carrow Road. The Argentinian playmaker settled the game in memorable fashion just past the hour when he volleyed home a deep lofted pass, his sublime first touch leaving Jack Walton with no chance. It was Buendía’s seventh goal of an impressive season, with his performances drawing interest from a number of Premier League clubs – but Farke is determined to keep his prized asset beyond the current transfer window. “Emi is a key player for us, an important member of the group, and he is totally committed to us,” said Farke. “He is our player and will continue to be our player. He is on a long-term contract so we keep him. Everyone knows his qualities – I don’t expect interest just because he scored a wonder goal today. People know what he can do.” The win left Norwich four points clear at the top with 47 points from 23 games. “This is the best start to a season Norwich have had,” said Farke. “I’m happy, but there’s still a long way to go.” The return of Jimmy-Floyd Hasselbaink as manager could not inspire bottom club Burton, who slipped to a 5-1 home defeat against Oxford. Matt Taylor and two Olamide Shodipo goals put the visitors out of sight, despite Kane Hemmings' consolation, before the break, with Josh Ruffels adding a fourth and fifth in the second half. Tom Hopper pounced with just seven minutes left on the clock to extend Lincoln’s lead at the top to four points by beating AFC Wimbledon. Tayo Edun’s opener for the Imps was cancelled out by Ollie Palmer, only for Hopper to seal the points late on. A Hakeeb Adelakun tap-in set Hull on their way to victory over 10-man Charlton, who had Darren Pratley sent off, as the Tigers moved up to second. After Pratley was dismissed for an off-the-ball incident, Greg Docherty sealed the 2-0 victory. Brandon Hanlan and Sam Nicholson turned things around for Bristol Rovers after Gary Madine put Blackpool into an early lead. Hanlon could have made things easier but saw a penalty saved by loanee goalkeeper Sam Walker. Luke Jephcott settled Plymouth Argyle’s clash with Gillingham in the Pilgrims’ favour. Northampton and Sunderland played out a goalless draw. Wigan’s trip to Swindon  and Accrington v Portsmouth fell found of the weather, while four games were postponed for Covid-related reasons. Jamal Lowe struck twice as Swansea came from behind to move up to second with with a 2-1 win over Watford at the Liberty Stadium. Tom Cleverley had fired the visitors into a 20th-minute lead but Lowe levelled before the break, then headed home a Korey Smith cross for the winner midway through the second half. Junior Stanislas struck with ten minutes to play to give Bournemouth a 1-0 victory away at Stoke, moving them to third, while Lucas João was on target twice as he made an impressive return from injury in Reading’s 2-1 win at Huddersfield. Fraizer Campbell gave the home side an early lead but João equalised seven minutes after the break. He then settled the contest with a superb turn and long-range strike 13 minutes later. Reading’s manager, Veljko Paunovic, said the display signalled a change in their mentality. “We know we win a lot when we take the lead first, but when we concede first we’re not usually capable of winning. We are addressing that.” Wycombe remain bottom after losing 3-1 at home to Middlesbrough. Uche Ikpeazu scored his first goal for the club after three minutes but Marcus Browne and Marcus Tavernier responded and Chuba Akpom put the result beyond doubt nine minutes from time. Carlisle made the most of previous leaders Newport County’s frozen pitch to move into top spot after beating Walsall 2-0. Omari Patrick fired the opener into the roof of the net, with Joshua Kayode putting the result beyond doubt. Mansfield did not look back after taking a first-minute lead against Port Vale through Ollie Clarke. Striker Jordan Bowery hit a hat-trick for the Stags in a game which effectively over when Valiants defender Leon Legge was dismissed for a second bookable offence in the 47th minute. A Charlie Carter double took Stevenage out of the relegation places as they defeated Scunthorpe 2-1. Grimsby were the side who slipped into the bottom two, as they lost by the same scoreline at home to Cambridge. Crawley ended the day in a playoff spot thanks to George Francomb’s goal at Bolton. A 17th goal of the season from Leyton Orient striker Danny Johnson was enough to see off Salford City. Forest Green Rovers and Oldham were drawing 1-1 when the officials decided to abandon the match due to fog, resulting in limited visibility. The pitches at Harrogate and Barrow froze over and four more fixtures had to be postponed due to Covid issue. Millwall’s poor home form continued as they were beaten 2-1 by Coventry at The Den. The Lions fell behind when Jake Cooper turned into his own net after 20 minutes and Gustavo Hamer added Coventry’s second six minutes later. Jed Wallace pulled one back from the spot but it was not enough for Millwall, who had Murray Wallace sent off late on as their winless home run extended to eight games. Bradley Dack scored his first goal for more than a year as Blackburn won 2-0 at Birmingham. He struck in injury time to wrap up victory after Adam Armstrong had claimed his 17th goal of the season. Lewis Grabban scored a 70th-minute penalty as Nottingham Forest won 1-0 at Preston while Rotherham’s match with Cardiff was postponed an hour before kick-off following snow in South Yorkshire.