Hopes of an imminent boost to racing’s finances as it struggles to recover from the effects of the coronavirus pandemic appeared to recede on Thursday, after an apparent step back by the government from an early review of the sport’s funding system via the Betting Levy. The sport is plotting a recovery from what seems sure to be well over a year with no spectators in attendance. Changes to the sport’s legal and financial frameworks are never swift or easy, but reform of the Levy – for instance, to include bets placed on races overseas – has been suggested as a potential source of between £30m and £40m a year in revenue. The prospect seemed within reach when Nigel Huddleston, the minister for sport, told the House of Commons in December that the department of culture, media and sport would examine reform of the Levy in 2021, three years earlier than necessary under legislation. Now, however, the Racing Post reports that Huddleston wrote to Anna-Marie Phelps, the British Horseracing Authority (BHA) chair, this week to say – in what sounds like classic Yes, Minister-ese – his department will only examine “whether there was a case for bringing forward the timetable” for review. The BHA insisted on Thursday that little has changed, and that it will “look forward to continuing our dialogue with government, and providing further evidence which highlights the need for urgent reform of the Levy to ensure that it is sustainable and fit for the digital age.” However, a sense that racing has already started to slide down the government’s list of priorities – having not been unduly prominent in the first place – is hard to escape. The betting industry, which faces issues of its own with a review of the gambling laws underway, is also likely to resist an extension of the Levy to bets on overseas racing for as long as it possibly can. This aspect of the BHA’s plans is an attempt to reach straight into the bookmakers’ balance sheets and remove tens of millions of pounds from their gross profits,. While there is certainly an argument that British racing has as much right to it as the betting firms do, that is not quite the same thing as earning or deserving it. Newcastle 12.40 Jen's Fella 1.10 Utopian Lad 1.40 Pallas Dancer 2.10 Glen Again 2.40 Cityzen Serg 3.10 Oo De Lally 3.40 Equate 4.10 Klopp (nb) Southwell 4.30 The British Lion 5.00 Star Of St James (nap) 5.30 Pina Collada 6.00 First Excel 6.30 Unleash 7.00 Qaaraat 7.30 Artistic Streak Levy income will be the sport’s principal source of revenue until crowds return, and it seems likely to dwindle further over the next few days as the weather intervenes to disrupt the racing programme. Friday’s main meeting – the Huntingdon card which was due to feature the Sidney Banks Memorial Hurdle, won 12 months ago by Shishkin – was abandoned on Thursday after a nearby brook burst its banks, while the scheduled card at Sedgefield was abandoned on Wednesday. Jumping at Lingfield next Monday has also been lost to waterlogging, although the card has been re-arranged as a “Jumpers Bumpers” fixture on the all-weather track. No problems are currently reported at Warwick, where the 13-runner Classic Chase is due to be the feature race of Saturday’s action.