Claiming a camping or caravanning trip, tour or trek as a tax deduction has been suggested as a way to support the Covid-hit tourism sector. As the federal government’s jobkeeper subsidy trickles to a stop, a spokesman for the Caravan Industry Association of Australia, Stuart Lamont, has called for more support. Rather than travel vouchers, he suggested personal tax deductions for accommodation and tours. “The government is only forgoing the opportunity of a tax take while people are going out and spending money in the community, and that money rolls around many times, particularly in regional communities,” he said. “Some sort of incentive in that way, which is tax-related as opposed to just a handout for those people who want to go away on holidays, is a more sustainable model to investigate.” Caravan and camping accounted for 44% of all holiday nights and were the most popular choice during the September quarter, Tourism Research Australia said. But not all areas have benefited because of border closures. Lamont said “the nervousness of people to travel long distances for fear of not being able to get back to their home” is a problem. Tasmania, the Northern Territory and Western Australia would usually enjoy a substantial numbers of international visitors and they had also been hit by domestic travel restrictions. Among other proposals to support the tourism industry are concessional loans for tourism operators – repaid when they return to profit – and access to advisory services to pivot to new markets. Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk wants an extension of support for hard-hit industries such as tourism. “Perhaps Scott Morrison and the federal government could look at those industries that are doing it tough, and maybe jobkeeper, it does need to be extended for those industries,” she said this week. “We know other industries have bounced back after Covid and some industries are doing a lot better than others, but we do know that the tourism industry is hurting, especially those regions which relied heavily on international travellers.” On Sunday the federal government launched a week-long, $5m advertising blitz encouraging domestic travel in 2021. Federal trade, tourism and investment minister Dan Tehan said the government wants Australians to get excited about holidaying domestically. “Our country is one of the most popular tourist destinations in the world and this year is an opportunity for Australians to discover why,” he said. Domestic tourism is worth $100bn to the economy and the industry supports more than 621,000 jobs. Tourism Australia’s managing director Phillipa Harrison said the “Holiday Here This Year” campaign was about “capitalising on this pent-up demand by providing these people with all the content and inspiration they need to convert this desire and yearning for a holiday into actual bookings”. The campaign includes national advertising, TV program and event sponsorships, and native content.