While growing up in India, my mum, who sadly passed away in 2019, would always cook dishes that she thought were wholesome and would be enjoyed by the family or her friends. She made her own paneer but, years later, was very happy that she was able to buy it. On a very wet day, she would make us paneer pakoras, or shahi paneer on special occasions. Paneer, as we know it, is easily available in supermarkets these days. If you’re making it at home, use full-fat milk: bring a litre to a boil, lower the temperature, add the juice of one small lemon and stir until the milk curdles. Remove from the heat, leave to cool for 10 minutes, then strain through a muslin cloth and squeeze out all the whey. Prep 10 minCook 25 minServes 3-4 as a side 350g spinach, washed 1 heaped tsp  cornmeal flour4 tsp ghee1 tsp cumin seeds7 tsp (15g) peeled and finely chopped ginger3½ tsp (10g) peeled and finely chopped garlic120g white onion, peeled and finely chopped3 green bird’s eye chillies, finely sliced, seeds and all1 tsp salt1 tsp ground turmeric1 tsp heaped garam masala1 tsp ground cumin200g paneer, diced into chunks Put the spinach and 150ml hot water in a pan and cook for three to four minutes, until wilted. Add the flour and blitz to a puree with a hand blender. To make the tadka, or temper, heat three teaspoons of the ghee in a saucepan and add the cumin seeds. Once they start to sizzle, add the ginger and garlic, and cook for a minute. Add the onions and chillies, and cook for five minutes on a medium heat. Add the salt, turmeric, garam masala and ground cumin, cook for a minute, then stir in the spinach puree, lower the heat and leave to cook gently. Meanwhile, heat the rest of the ghee in a small frying pan and cook the diced paneer, turning it often, until browned on all sides. Add the paneer to the spinach mix, cook for three or four minutes more, until the paneer is soft and the spinach is nice and smooth, and serve with roti or paratha. Prep 15 minCook 20 minServes 3-4 as a side For the marinade1 tsp peeled and grated ginger1 tsp peeled and grated garlic1 tsp tandoori masala3 tsp water200g paneer, diced into chunks2 tsp sunflower oil (or ghee or butter) For the sauce3 tsp ghee2 tsp peeled and grated ginger1 tsp peeled and grated garlic1 tsp salt2 tsp caster sugar1 tsp tandoori masala1 tsp garam masala1 tsp red chilli powder1 tsp ground turmeric2 tsp methi (AKA dried fenugreek leaves)6 green cardamom pods, crushed1 x 400g tin tomatoes, pureed100ml single cream50g cashew nuts, soaked in 100ml water and blended into paste Put all the marinade ingredients except the oil in a bowl, then set aside for 15 minutes. Heat the ghee in a pan and, once hot, add the ginger and garlic, and cook for two minutes. Stir in the salt, sugar, tandoori masala, garam masala, red chilli powder, ground turmeric, methi and crushed cardamom, and cook for another minute. Add the pureed tomatoes, stir to combine, then add the cream and cashew paste and cook on a medium heat, still stirring so the sauce doesn’t stick to the base of the pan, for about three minutes. While the sauce is cooking, heat the oil in a pan and, once hot, add the marinated paneer and fry, turning regularly, for three minutes, until cooked evenly on all sides. Transfer the paneer to the sauce and cook for a further four minutes, until the sauce is creamy and the paneer is soft. Serve with naan or roti. Prep 20 minCook 20 minServes 3-4 as a side For the marinade 200g paneer, diced into chunks3 tsp (8g) peeled and grated ginger 3 tsp (8g) peeled and grated garlic1 tsp red chilli powder1 tsp ground cumin1 tsp ground coriander4 tsp dark soy sauce1 tsp honey For the base6 tsp sunflower oil1 tsp panch phoron (you can buy this spice mix ready-made, but it’s made with equal parts nigella, fennel, cumin, black mustard and fenugreek seeds if you fancy doing it yourself)2¼ tsp (6g) peeled and thinly sliced garlic200g red onion, peeled and thinly sliced3-4 green bird’s eye chillies, finely chopped, seeds and all1 tsp salt2 tsp tamarind chutney½ tsp ground turmeric1 tsp ground cumin1 tsp honey4 tsp soy sauce2 tsp tomato puree6 mixed sweet peppers, seeds removed, roughly diced into chunks Put all the marinade ingredients in a bowl, toss to combine, then set aside. To make the base, heat the oil in a wide-bottomed pan over a medium heat and, once hot, add the panch phoron. As soon as it starts to sizzle, add the garlic, cook for a minute, then add the onion and chillies, and saute, stirring often, for six to seven minutes. Stir in the salt, chutney, spices, honey, soy sauce, tomato puree and 20ml water, and cook for two minutes. Add the sweet peppers, cook for another two minutes, then stir in the paneer and its marinade. Lower the heat, cover the pan and leave to cook for five minutes, until the paneer is soft to the touch. Serve hot with rice, roti or naan. Prep 35 minCook 15 minServes 3-4 as a side For the batter75g gram (AKA chickpea) flour1 tsp salt1 tsp garam masala½ tsp ground turmeric1 tsp chilli powderSunflower oil, for fryingChaat masala, to serve For the marinade1 tsp ground cumin½ tsp chaat masala220g paneer block, cut in half through the middle, and then into square slabs For the chutney25g fresh mint20g fresh coriander, chopped2 green bird’s eye chillies, roughly chopped, seeds and all 50g green apple, peeled, cored and cut into small dice40g red onion, peeled and diced small½ tsp salt1 tsp caster sugarJuice of ½ lemon50-60ml water2 tsp olive oil To make the batter, sift the flour into a bowl, add the salt, garam masala, turmeric and chilli powder and mix to combine. Gently pour in 100ml water, mixing it in to form a thick batter – it should be sticky and not very runny. Mix the marinade spices in a second bowl, add the paneer, toss to coat and leave to and marinate for 10 minutes. Put all the chutney ingredients in a blender and blitz to a fine paste. Pour oil into a deep pan or wok to come halfway up the sides and heat up carefully. Meanwhile, take one square of paneer, spread a thin layer of the chutney over one side, then put a second paneer square on the top like a sandwich. Transfer to a plate, and repeat with the remaining paneer. Once the oil is hot, dip the paneer into the batter and, working in batches, deep-fry for three to four minutes, until crisp and golden brown on all sides. Transfer to a plate lined with kitchen paper, to drain off the excess oil, and repeat until all the pakoras are fried. Transfer to a serving plate, sprinkle with chaat masala and serve with the leftover chutney and a cup of warming chai. • Romy Gill is the author of Zaika: Vegan Recipes from India (Orion, £20). To order a copy for £17.40, go to guardianbookshop.com