Ateh Jewel Fri 22 Jan 2021 15.46 GMT


Last modified on Mon 25 Jan 2021 11.51 GMT Water and hydration are the very source of life, it’s what our bodies are made of. Up to 60% of the human body is water – from our hearts (73% water), to our bones (31%) and our skin (64%). It has even been linked to better moods. But though it might seem simple, with many people holding on to the golden rule of drinking eight glasses of water a day, there are still many myths and misunderstandings around hydration. Is caffeine really dehydrating? Should you drink a glass of water for every cup of coffee? Can you drink too much water? Do people with oily skin really need more hydration? How do topical solutions work? And is hyaluronic acid really as good as everyone says it is? Lack of hydration is often the culprit when it comes to fine lines and dullness, as well as other skincare concerns. London-based dermatology registrar Dr Cristina Psomadakis says skin hydration is absolutely paramount to maintaining a healthy skin barrier and ensuring that skin cells shed at a normal pace. Adequate hydration is one of the key elements of a fresh-faced glow and minimises the appearance of cracks, flakes or wrinkles in the skin. This is true for all skin types and all skin tones, which is why hydration is so important. Oily skin and dry skin can both be dehydrated. Drier skin types are usually classified by having fewer oil-producing glands compared with oily or combination skin. However, dry skin can be thirsty with a lack of water as well as oil. By the same rule, oily skin types can also be dehydrated with a lack of water and not oil. But drinking eight glasses of water isn’t the only way to get hydrated. You should also aim to consume water through food too. Eating foods rich in water helps the body to absorb the water more slowly, which means the water we get from foods such as cucumbers, watermelon, bell peppers, strawberries, celery and iceberg lettuce keeps us hydrated as well as giving the body a boost of minerals, vitamins and fibre. There is also a myth that caffeine excessively dehydrates you. It is true that caffeine can act as a mild diuretic, but according to a study by the University of Birmingham, where 50 men habitually consumed three to six cups of coffee a day, there was no evidence to show that they were more dehydrated than those who drank water alone. But when it comes to drinking water, you can get too much of a good thing. Overhydration – or hyponatremia – is a condition where sodium and electrolyte levels can become dangerously low due to drinking too much water. This can cause headaches, nausea, muscle weakness and can even be fatal in extreme cases. So finding the right balance is key. Stress, pollution, blue light from devices, exposure to UV and a lack of sleep can all affect the skin and its ability to retain water and stay plump. Staying hydrated is great for the body and helps to regulate mood. As our brain is mostly made up of water, drinking the right amount of it helps keep headaches at bay. Water is also great for helping us stay more focused. But how can the skin also get a drink of water to help boost its function? Serums are an incredible way to quickly give the skin a potent shot of hard working ingredients. Vichy’s Minéral 89 Hyaluronic Acid Hydration Serum helps to plump and fortify the skin for long-lasting moisture and hydration. This fresh gel-like formula is great for all skin types, even thirsty combination and oily skin types whose skin may also need a shot of water. This fast-absorbing serum is enriched with hyaluronic acid, glycerine (a great humectant) and 89% Vichy volcanic mineralising water. The serum also has the seal of approval from the British Skin Foundation. Hyaluronic acid – due to the “acid” in its name – might sound a bit scary, but it’s known as a souped-up skincare wonder ingredient for its hydrating properties. ”Hyaluronic acid is a sugary substance that we make naturally in our body – it is found in the skin, eyes, joints, even the umbilical cord,” says Psomadakis. “Hyaluronic acid is classed as a humectant, which basically means it’s a hydration magnet – it helps draw moisture from the environment and surface of your skin.” Whether it’s upping your water intake by drinking it, consuming food with high water content, or slathering on great skincare to help boost hydration, water is definitely key for bouncy, radiant and plump skin. Save 25% on Vichy Hydration Essentials now at Lookfantastic. For a limited time receive a 3-month free trial to Headspace Plus when you purchase Minéral 89 Serum*. *Save 25% valid until 10 February 2021. Headspace offer valid until 16 February 2021 on LookFantastic.com. After your 90 days free trial, the subscription renews automatically at £49.99 for an annual subscription to Headspace Plus. You can cancel at any time. This offer is for new or existing free Headspace users only. Credit card details needed to redeem. Offer can be redeemed until 30 June 2021.