Anish Giri, the Netherlands No 1, has several times narrowly missed first place at Tata Steel Wijk aan Zee, and the 26-year-old now has his best chance yet for victory in the “chess Wimbledon” where no Dutchman has won since 1985. Giri leads a closely packed group of front runners by half a point, although he still has to meet his nemesis, the world champion, Magnus Carlsen, who trails in sixth place with only a slender chance even if he wins his last three games. And the first of this trio of tests is Giri against Carlsen in round 11 on Friday. Scores after 10 of the 13 rounds were Giri (Netherlands) 7, Alireza Firouzja, Andrey Esipenko (Russia) and Fabiano Caruana (US) 6.5, Jorden van Foreest (Netherlands) 6, Carlsen (Norway) 5.5. Friday’s and Saturday’s rounds 11 and 12, which start at 1pm, plus the decisive final round 13 at midday on Sunday, can be watched free and live with grandmaster commentary on the official platform or on major chess websites. It should be a tense occasion and possibly a historic one, depending on the result. Carlsen’s defeat by 18-year-old Esipenko has been the major shock. The world champion began with a fine win against Firouzja, then drew his next six. In round 10, he also halved with Caruana in a hard-fought game after defeating the early Swedish leader Nils Grandelius. The loss to Esipenko was thus an outlier, even more from the poor quality of Black’s play than the result. The champion fell for a simple early tactic where Esipenko’s queen forked a c6 knight and a h8 rook and after that it was just a matter of keepimg calm and avoiding Carlsen’s shallow traps. It was Carlsen’s first defeat in classical chess to an opponent born in the 21st century, and his first loss to a sub-2700 rated player since 2015, while the result pushed Esipenko’s official Fide rating above 2700, the yardstick figure for the global elite. After 10 rounds, the 18-year-old Russian remains unbeaten. However, Esipenko’s statistics pall beside those of Firouzja, a year younger, who was also unbeaten after 10 rounds and has continued to play in the complex, imaginative and innovative style which brought him second prize behind Carlsen at Stavanger in October. With 2758 Fide points in the live ratings, Firouzja has jumped to No 14 in the world. His new surge has surpassed the former world champions Vlad Kramnik and Vishy Anand and the 2016 challenger Sergey Karjakin, and puts him only six rating points away from the super-elite of the top 10. That represents a speed of improvement achieved in the past at age 15-17 by Bobby Fischer, Garry Kasparov and Carlsen, and probably by nobody else. Carlsen v Firouzja for the world crown looks a serious possibility in 2023 or 2025, although the eight-player candidates tournament which decides the challenger is a hazard which almost trapped Carlsen in 2012. 3708: 1 Bxf3 Qxf3 2 Rexe3! dxe3 3 Qb2+! wins a rook.