The FBI has appealed for people to help identify the Capitol rioters on Thursday, as some of the more prominent members of the pro-Trump mob began to be named online. They include Jake Angeli, whose horned hat and furs drew the eye of many watching at home, and Richard Barnett, who was photographed sitting at Nancy Pelosi’s desk as a mob of Trump supporters besieged the Capitol building. A total of 68 people were arrested on Wednesday, according to DC police, and just one of those was local to the area – a detail that reveals the mass of people who descended on DC for the protest. Here are some of those prominently photographed or filmed inside the Capitol. A believer in the QAnon conspiracy theory, which has been linked to a slew of violence in the US, Angeli is a regular fixture at rightwing events and pro-Trump rallies. The 32-year-old, who was seen bare-chested and wearing a woolly horned hat, is an Arizona native who is has frequently appeared outside the state’s capitol building, the Arizona Republic reported. Angeli told a reporter for the Globe and Mail newspaper that police had initially blocked him and other supporters from entering the Capitol, before letting them enter. He said that police later asked him to leave, and let him go without arrest. Colt was identified by the Idaho Statesman after he was photographed on the Senate floor, where he sat in the chair of the president of the Senate, Mike Pence. The Statesman reported that Colt, 34, is from Boise and is the CEO of a company called Funnel Craft LLC. “I hopped down into the chamber and I was the first one to sit in Nancy Pelosi’s [chair],” Colt said in a video posted to, and later removed from, Facebook. Colt had apparently confused the Senate for the House of Representatives. The 60-year-old leader of a pro-gun rights group in Arkansas, Barnett was photographed sitting at a desk in Nancy Pelosi’s office. According to the Washington Post, Barnett, had identified as a white nationalist in a Facebook post days before the riot took place. “I am white. There is no denying that. I am a nationalist. I put my nation first. So that makes me a white nationalist,” Barnett wrote, according to the Post. The New York Times reported that Barnett, who said his nickname is “Bigo”, had taken a personalized envelope from Pelosi’s desk. Barnett told the Times that after he gained access to Pelosi’s office: “I wrote her a nasty note, put my feet up on her desk and scratched my balls.” On 14 December, Evans, a Republican, was sworn in as a lawmaker in the West Virginia house of delegates. On Wednesday, Evans reportedly filmed himself and others storming the Capitol, shouting: “We’re in! Keep it moving, baby!” as Trump supporters flooded into the building. The video, which Evans posted online, has since been deleted, but USA Today reported that Evans, who was wearing a black helmet, proceeded to enter the Capitol Rotunda. As he did so, Evans shouted: “Derrick Evans is in the Capitol!”, according to the Washington Post. Since then, more than 26,000 people have signed a petition demanding Evans be removed from office, while Democratic party leaders in West Virginia said Evans should resign and “be prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law”.