The Labour leader, Sir Keir Starmer, has urged Boris Johnson to impose a new national lockdown in England within the next 24 hours to tackle the “out of control” coronavirus. Speaking after the prime minister acknowledged that Covid-19 restrictions were “probably about to get tougher”, Starmer said immediate action must be taken. “The virus is clearly out of control,” he said on Sunday. “There’s no good [in] the prime minister hinting that further restrictions are coming into place in a week, or two or three. “That delay has been the source of so many problems. So, I say, bring in those restrictions now, national restrictions, within the next 24 hours. That has to be the first step to controlling the virus.” On Sunday, the UK recorded 454 Covid deaths that had taken place within 28 days of a positive test, bringing the official coronavirus death toll over 75,000. Government figures also showed there were a further 54,990 Covid infections – the sixth day in a row the number was above 50,000. Earlier, Johnson said he was “fully reconciled” to potentially having to “do things in the next few weeks that will be tougher”, and that coronavirus curbs were “probably about to get tougher”. Nearly eight in 10 people in England are already under tier 4 “stay at home” measures, which include the closure of non-essential shops and strict one-to-one outdoor meeting limits between households, but Johnson suggested stricter restrictions could be introduced. Asked whether it may be necessary to introduce tougher, “tier 5” restrictions in the near future, Johnson told BBC One’s The Andrew Marr Show: “It may be that we need to do things in the next few weeks that will be tougher in … many parts of the country … I’m fully, fully reconciled to that. And I bet the people of this country are reconciled to that.” Speaking later on Sunday, Starmer said there should be no delay. “We can’t allow the prime minister to use up the next two or three weeks and then bring in the national lockdown that is inevitable. Do it now. That’s the necessary first step to get the virus back under control.” Despite warning of stricter measures on the horizon, and in the face of pressure from education unions, the prime minister separately urged parents to send their children into primary schools on Monday in areas of the country where they were still set to open. The prospect of vaccines being rolled out in their “tens of millions” should keep people going through a “bumpy” period, Johnson added. Starmer said: “Everybody wants children back in schools. Nobody would argue with that. Of course that’s what we all want. “I don’t want to call for the closure of schools tomorrow morning and add to the chaos, but we do need to recognise that it’s inevitable that more schools will close, and we need a plan in place to deal with that. But it can only be part of a wider strategy that has a national lockdown in place in the next 24 hours. The prime minister is hinting at it, but he’s not doing it. And we can’t afford that delay again.” Starmer said he was not calling for all schools to close, explaining that should be the “last resort, not the first resort”. In an apparent reference to tier 3 areas where non-essential shops were still allowed to open, he added: “We can’t have retail open in some places and schools closed.” Sir Mark Walport, who sits on the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) and was formerly the UK government’s chief scientific adviser, said it was “pretty clear” that more restrictions would be needed to reduce transmission of the virus. It is understood that Labour wants the government to consider March-style lockdown measures, including a clearer stay-at-home message, as well as a re-evaluation regarding non-essential services that are open. Responding to Starmer’s intervention, a No 10 source said: “The prime minister has been consistently clear that we are driven by the need to protect the NHS and save lives – unlike Labour who have spent the last 10 months playing party politics. We have moved more areas into tier 4 to bear down on the new variant and escalated other areas into tier 3. This targeted approach is the right one, and is kept under review based on the latest data.” Leaders in Liverpool, which is in tier 3, have also called on Downing Street to impose a national lockdown. The acting mayor, Wendy Simon, and the city council’s cabinet say action is needed to address rising Covid cases, which have reached “alarming levels”. Chris Hopson, the chief executive of NHS Providers, which represents hospital trusts in England, said “appropriate restrictions” were needed. Pointing out that, as of Saturday, the number of Covid patients in hospital had risen by 5,800 since Christmas Day, he told Sky News: “That’s something like 12 extra full hospitals, full of Covid patients, a 33% increase in just eight days. So you can imagine why people in the NHS are worried about how quickly this virus is spreading. “So yes, everybody in the NHS is really very clear that we need to have appropriate restrictions in place.” Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, said her cabinet would meet on Monday morning to discuss “further action” to prevent the spread of Covid before she sets out decisions to a recalled Holyrood.