I live by myself and often find it hard to get inspired about dinner. Recipes are always for four or more. Can I just quarter the ingredients? Joe, Wolverhampton You are not alone, Joe. It’s this very predicament that prompted Signe Johansen to write Solo: The Joy of Cooking for One. “It’s trickier to scale a recipe down than it is to scale it up,” she sympathises. Essentially, it’s an arithmetic challenge, and recipes don’t always divide neatly. The best thing to do, she says, is to forget about exact quantities altogether: “Start [adding ingredients] conservatively, then taste your way to a consistency and flavour you like.” When it comes to inspiration, don’t beat yourself up, either – we’re all tapped out as it is. “Rather than thinking that every week has to be a dazzling cabaret of exciting dishes, start small and make compromises,” Johansen says. That could mean getting a takeaway one night, then cooking something the next. Writing a weekly menu will help, too: “Do it on a Sunday, when you’re relaxed. You don’t have to stick to it religiously, but it will make you think more carefully about what you’re buying.” The benefit of solo cooking, of course, is that you have only yourself to please. This is a sentiment Itamar Srulovich, chef/co-owner, with his wife Sarit Packer, of London’s Honey & Co, fully embraces when home alone: “Sarit doesn’t eat spicy food, so that’s when I crank up the heat with Yotam Ottolenghi’s black pepper tofu or Meera Sodha’s chilli paneer.” Another Srulovich special is Nigella Lawson’s Marmite pasta, made with just four ingredients (spaghetti, butter, Marmite, parmesan). “It’s the best thing, and straddles the line between trash and self-care, it’s so quick and you make it in one pot – you could even eat it straight from the pot, because no one else is there.” Seafood makes a top treat, too. “Cooking scallops for numerous people can be tricky to time and are quite expensive, but they’re great for solo cooks,” Johansen says, “while smoked fish – mackerel, trout, hot smoked salmon – are great to have on standby.” It’s also worth making friends with your freezer, for fish finger sandwiches with Nordic dill salsa, AKA “lots of herbs, anchovies, gherkins, capers, or whatever you have to hand to make a punchy sauce”. Frozen soffritto (diced onion, carrot and celery) is another Johansen trick: “It’s really useful and something I’ve used constantly since last March.” She sweats defrosted soffritto in olive oil, adds herbs (dried or fresh) and a tin of tomatoes, and you have a quick base for soups, sauces and stews. There are, of course, some dishes that are best avoided. “Big cuts of meat are obviously more challenging,” Johansen says, “but a rack of lamb will still give you that satisfaction of cooking something more celebratory.” Or a small trout, if you fancy fish – ask a butcher and fishmonger for advice. And don’t scrimp on dessert. Srulovich wisely keeps a batch of cookies in the freezer – his current favourite is a miso, walnut and chocolate chip number. “You can then cook them one at a time from frozen. Well, I say one …” • Got a culinary dilemma? Email feast@theguardian.com