For generations in the western New South Wales town of Moree, on Gamilaraay-Gomeroi country, segregation began at birth. At the back of the Moree district hospital, the McMaster Ward was where Aboriginal babies were born. The ward also provided all the necessary care for Aboriginal people and was staffed by Aboriginal nurses. Moree is synonymous with the strong will, determination and resilience of its people, who in the face of some of Australia’s harshest forms of segregation and racial discrimination have created a tightknit and proud community. They each chose to be photographed at a site that holds importance to them. Lyall Munro Jr stands in Endeavour Lane, Moree, where his dear friend Ronald ‘Cheeky’ McIntosh was shot and killed in 1982 Lyall Munro, Ronald “Cheeky” McIntosh and a group of friends had been having customary drinks the night before the Boomerang Football club’s presentation at the Ned Kelly bar at the Imperial Hotel when a racially fuelled altercation broke out. Munro’s group fled the hotel and were chased through the streets of Moree to Endeavour Lane, they were outnumbered 10 to one and then they were fired upon. McIntosh died instantly. No less than 18 shots were fired, according to a report in the Canberra Times on 25 November 1983. Two men, Warren John Ledingham and Stephen Gregory, were charged with manslaughter and sentenced to 14 years in jail. All of the generations up until the 1960s were all born in the segregated section of Moree district hospital in the McMaster Ward and we experienced the racism that we grew to become used to, right there in the segregated ward. After being born on the McMaster Ward we lived on the new mission in Moree. I remember sitting on the fence of the mission as a kid and wondering what was on the other side and why we couldn’t leave. The fence was only short, you could high-jump it if you wanted. Animals could go through it as free as they pleased ... but we couldn’t. Some roads are paved with good intentions but not in this town. The missions served as concentration camps and it was a place intended for Aboriginal people to die out. You have to stand your ground. That is the only way we came out of it. The current Covid-19 lockdowns and segregation have made white Australia go crazy over the last nine months. Those of us who lived under the protection era are quite used to this system of being told what to do and where to go and being segregated from different parts of the town. We’ve known this way of life since birth. Elaine Samson stands by the Steel Bridge in Moree where she grew up living in the Steel Bridge Camp on the banks of the Mehi River I was employed by the Moree district hospital up until around 12 years ago. I have served there for a total of 50 years working as a nurse’s aid in the McMasters Ward, where I was also born, and then when the hospital desegregated I worked on the children’s ward and then later as a cleaner. I had to stop my education in my second year of high school and find work to help my family, and with my first pay packet from the McMaster Ward I bought a pole from the electricity company to get power for our house. There was no formal training, it was more or less hands-on, we learned on the job and had some of the trained sisters come in to help. We never called on any of the help from the other staff in the white hospital. All of the nurses on the ward were local Aboriginal people, some from the mission and some from Thompsons Row and the town. It was nice nursing our own people and alongside the Aboriginal nurses there were Aboriginal yardsmen, kitchen workers, and even my own mother worked in the laundry room and some of her brothers worked in the boiler house, all helping take care of the patients and the hospital. Brolgas flying over Top Camp On the McMaster Ward I worked with the elderly, women, men, outpatients and the maternity women. The maternity section of the ward was only a few beds and a birthing room. The mothers had it really tough then. I remember a Torres Strait Islander mother giving birth to twins and one of the twins was born really weak and had to be fed by a tube. The mother expressed as much milk as she could manage and ate cocoa for the milk to keep the baby strong. The European sister and the other nurses didn’t think the baby boy would survive but the care that they gave him was incredible. They never gave up on him. He ended up having a disability but he lived a good life and stayed in the town. He passed a few years ago when he was around 50 years old. We are a forgotten people out here and still are today. I have seen a lot of people come and go. I have also seen plenty of doctors come and go. The doctors don’t want to come to the rural areas now, it is just the same as the teachers, they do their training out here and get the experience and then leave. There was one doctor that used to come back to Moree and now his son, who is a gynaecologist from Sydney, comes to see us. He is very well known and liked by the Aboriginal community because we don’t have many specialists here. There are only two other women still alive who worked at the McMaster Ward, the rest have all passed on and these stories have all gone with them too I am afraid. Edna Craigie, 82, bought and paid for her own house in which generations of her family have gathered: ‘I am proud to be black and I love my people’ I was born on the black ward in 1939, the McMaster Ward. I grew up on the mission and my parents, before they had me, lived on the Top Camp. I went to school on the mission and I never went to high school. I just went straight to work at the Vic Hotel. My grandmother was the cook, my sister was the kitchen maid and I was the pantry maid. I was in the Girl Guides during school before I started work at the Vic Hotel. I made friends with the white girls but we had to go on with how things were at the time. It was a real colour bar here. If you aren’t black you’re white in Moree. At the movies I couldn’t go up the back and sit with my white Girl Guide friends, who I am still friends with now. We would meet up during the interval and talk without their parents knowing, they would talk to us on the sly. Children’s play equipment in tall grass on the outskirts of Stanley Village, also known as Top Camp. It was a designated area for Aboriginal people to live during the towns infamous era of segregation We were always barred from places, we couldn’t go to the pool and we would ride our bikes down to the creek next to the mission on a Sunday. After Charles Perkins and the Freedom Rides came through, we can swim in the pool now, but you can’t afford it, it is around $50 for us to take the grannies for a day out. I am proud to be black and I love my people, it doesn’t matter whether they’re from Woop Woop or Moree. My home is my little castle. I worked and paid for it. Anyone is welcome here in my home. Marlene Howard Jenkins, 65, chose to be photographed by one of the gum trees her father planted by Stanley Village also know as Top Camp. She describes Moree as the ‘most racist town in Australia’ Moree has a big history of racism. I was born and bred here in Moree. I grew up on the Top Camp in a tin hut with dirt floors, by the riverbank; it is my strongest memory. We had our own Aboriginal school, our own Girl Guides, and we weren’t allowed to swim in the swimming pool. I was up there with Charlie Perkins when I was a young kid and I remember having eggs pelted at us, but it was joyous when we swam in the pool, because we won. But when we would go to the matinees we had to sit at the front and the non-Aboriginal people had to sit at the back and I remember they would pelt the little Jaffa lollies at our heads, and at the open air picture shows they would stone us with the gravel and hide under the canvas seats. I was only a young kid at the time, but I was up there with the Freedom Rides with Charlie Perkins and I remember having eggs pelted at us and it was joyous when we swam in the pool, because we won. There was a lot of discrimination here, but where we lived we were all united, and my childhood was the best years of my life, and I love Moree. Polly Cutmore is currently fighting on behalf of Gomeroi people to stop Santos from gas mining her people’s land I always thought there was something really special about my people. We got our own school, our own mission, our own hospital and we always got stared at when we walked around the town – we still do – and so I thought ‘oh we must be a really deadly mob’. I didn’t know we were different and I didn’t realise what racism was then when I was growing up. I grew up down at the mission and you’d talk to the elders down there and they’d been born at McMaster Ward just like I was and they also went to the mission school when they were young. The mission pool was built in the 60s ... and yes sometimes they did wash us kids down with DDT before we could swim in the pool. I thought they were trying to turn my skin white. When my mother was going to hospital to give birth to me they had to get the mission manager to ring the ambulance and give permission for the ambulance to come and collect her. My mother had me at the Aboriginal section of the hospital, at the McMaster Ward, which was staffed by Aboriginal nurses, some who were from the mission as well. I tried to find the records from the McMaster Ward but they burned them all at the hospital. Knowing that I was born here is all gone. But we are still fighters here in Moree. Yanaay Santos!