For Liverpool, it was the definition of a defensive unravelling, the speed and chaos of it taking the breath away. They had looked set for a much-needed victory after Mohamed Salah’s fine finish from Roberto Firmino’s even finer assist. The champions, though, have long since mislaid their certainty and this defeat, a fifth in 10 Premier League games, raised plenty more uncomfortable questions – not least whether they will be able to salvage a Champions League finish from a disastrous title defence. There was VAR drama about Leicester’s equaliser, which James Maddison claimed, but the defining moment came shortly afterwards,in the 81st minute, and for the second game in a row it involved an almost comical miscue by Alisson. Twice in last Sunday’s 4-1 home defeat to Manchester City the goalkeeper erred with clearances that led to goals, but this mistake felt even worse because it featured a collision with a teammate – the new signing Ozan Kabak, who endured a debut to forget. Youri Tielemans had aimed a high ball up towards Harvey Barnes and with Kabak backpedalling and Alisson rushing out of his area the perfect storm brewed. Kabak stretched out a leg to challenge at the same time as Alisson made his connection. But rather than clear, he pulled the ball square and directly at Jamie Vardy, who collected and ran it into the empty net. What was going on? As recently as 19 December Liverpool had looked odds-on to retain their title. That was the day when they put seven past Crystal Palace and sat five points clear at the top of the table. Little has gone right for them since. Their afternoon lurched further in the wrong direction when they conceded the third. Moments earlier, Jürgen Klopp had turned to rage at somebody behind him in the stands and now he watched Salah lose possession and Wilfried Ndidi set Barnes free of Kabak, who plainly did not have the legs to get back. Barnes steered confidently past Alisson and Leicester could feel their top-four hopes surge. There was only introspection and gloom for Liverpool. They had enjoyed the better of the first half and much of the second in terms of possession and territory but the fear problems lurked at the back had been advertised. Klopp fielded his 13th central defensive partnership of an injury-blighted season with Kabak coming in alongside Jordan Henderson, but there were two moments before the interval when the new defender looked vulnerable. Vardy spun in around the back of him on 12 minutes only to lob too high, while Kabak also slipped over just before half-time as Leicester sprang forward. Maddison played the final pass, a neat flick, and Vardy was clean through. His shot hit the crossbar. It was not only Kabak who struggled with Vardy. The centre-forward’s clearest chance of the first half came when he found space in behind Henderson to meet Barnes’s cross from the left, but his header was weak. Liverpool were bright at the outset, with Salah’s movement causing problems for Ricardo Pereira. He had two good chances in the opening quarter, plus other flickers but the end product was poor. Henderson got him away in the 10th minute with a lovely ball over the top and although Pereira got back to challenge it was still a surprise to see Salah miskick. Salah’s other big moment followed a Trent Alexander-Arnold through ball but rather than shoot he went for a cross that never looked like reaching Sadio Mané before Daniel Amartey. Alexander-Arnold played well in front of the watching England manager, Gareth Southgate, and he almost gave Liverpool the lead in the 57th minute only for his deflected free-kick to come back off the crossbar. Liverpool’s goal was a beauty, Firmino dragging the ball back with one foot before, in the same fluid movement, teeing up Salah with the other. Salah got his angles right this time, steering inside the far corner. The game turned sharply after Barnes drove in between Thiago Alcântara and Alexander-Arnold on the left of the area, feeling contact from the former and going to ground. A penalty was awarded only for VAR to call it back, having seen that the foul took place outside the box. Maddison whipped the free-kick low through a gaggle of bodies and into the far corner but again VAR was not happy, disallowing it for an offside against Amartey, who had tried and failed to play the ball in the middle. Or so it seemed. After further review, Amartey was deemed to have been onside and Maddison’s goal stood. Alisson would make a fine double save at 2-1 to deny Barnes and Vardy but by then the damage had been done. It would get worse. In this most topsy-turvy of seasons, Liverpool are on their knees.