Extracts from the private appointment diaries of the artist known as Christo, who wrapped the Pont Neuf in Paris and the Berlin Reichstag in fabric, have been published to promote a sale of his personal art collection. The notes of appointments and meetings – often accompanied with doodles – give a tantalising glimpse of what the auctioneers call the artist, who died last year, and his wife and collaborator Jeanne-Claude’s “hidden world” as they struggled to establish themselves in New York in the 1960s. The four books from 1964-1968, which are not being sold, also illustrate the pair’s illustrious circle of friends in New York, including Roy Lichtenstein, Andy Warhol and Marcel Duchamp. Entries range from the banal – a shopping list to make bolognese sauce for a dinner party with the Italian artist Mimmo Rotella; to the more beguiling – CALL ANDY WARHOL. On Monday 18 March 1968, the entry reads: “Andy Warhol Movies – 33 Union Square”. Another note in 1967 reads: “Dinner avec M Duchamp. A Warhol.” Duchamp and Christo first met in Milan in 1963, but became close friends in New York. “Christo used to say Marcel was quiet and didn’t like to talk about art but Jeanne-Claude had a very playful relationship with him. Christo said the only time Marcel was chatty was when Jeanne-Claude was sharing jokes and stories,” said Lorenza Giovanelli, Christo’s studio manager, friend and confidante. She added: “When Marcel came to dine at their house he was already quite old so they would put a stool on the landing on each floor so he could catch his breath coming upstairs. “Christo and Jeanne-Claude also spent quite a bit of time with Andy Warhol. They had lots of friends in common and would lunch or dine together or go to the movies. Christo said he was a very sweet, almost shy in person.” An eclectic mix of objects from Christo and Jeanne-Claude’s personal art collection are being auctioned by Sothebys. These include Warhol’s painting of the former first lady Jackie Kennedy –Jackie, 1964 – valued at up to €1m; a Warhol lithograph print, Liz, of Elizabeth Taylor signed with a ballpoint pen by the artist; and two Warhol lithograph prints entitled Flowers and Cow. There is also a bronze statue, Personnage by Joan Miró; drawings of the project to wrap the Pont Neuf and other Christo installations; and a miniature by Marcel Duchamp from the late 1930s. The sale includes Bacon and Egg, Ice Cream and Beef Steak from the early 1960s, which the Swedish sculptor Claes Oldenburg dedicated to Christo. The Bulgarian-born Christo, born Christo Vladimirov Javacheff, studied in Sofia before defecting to the west in 1957, travelling via Prague, Vienna and Geneva to Paris where he settled. It was in the French capital he met Jeanne-Claude Denat de Guillebon, the daughter of an aristocratic French general, who became his artistic partner and wife until her death in 2009 aged 74, and began experimenting with wrapping objects and monuments. The couple moved to New York in 1964 spending their first three years as illegal immigrants. When they disembarked from the SS France at the Port of New York, their onlypossessions were two mattresses and a Rietveld chair that Christo, a respectful admirer of the designer, had exchanged for one of his works. They rented two floors of an abandoned 19th-century factory building at 48 Howard Street where they lived for 56 years, eventually buying the entire building that served as residence and workshop. As well as surrounding 11 islands in Biscayne Bay in Miami with bright pink fabric and wrapping the Pont Neuf bridge in Paris, the couple’s most spectacular achievement is considered to be covering the Reichstag in Berlin in aluminium fabric. They always refused sponsorship funding the giant installations by selling preparatory drawings. In 1962, the pair set out plans to wrap the Arc de Triomphe in Paris, which was due to happen last year but was postponed because of the Covid-19 pandemic. L’Arc de Triomphe, Wrapped is set to be in situ for 16 days from 18 September 2021. Matthias Koddenberg, who wrote two books on Christo and Jeanne-Claude, suggests most of the works in the couple’s private collection had more sentimental than monetary value. “A large portion of the works stood as testaments to various friendships and encounters; each work was associated with an anecdote that was more precious to them than the work itself. Lucio Fontana, Yves Klein, Andy Warhol, Keith Haring (himself a great admirer of Christo and Jeanne-Claude)… In their eyes, the prestigious names weren’t important, but the stories that tied the pair to each of them certainly were,” Koddenberg writes in the auction catalogue. • The auction, Unwrapped: The Hidden World of Christo and Jeanne-Claude, will take place online from 8-18 February at sothebys.com and at Sotheby’s in Paris on 17 February