Like all desperate thrill-seekers in this interminable lockdown, I was momentarily stirred to hear there were some handbags between Boris Johnson and Keir Starmer in one of parliament’s corridors after prime minister’s questions on Wednesday. Yes! Action! I briefly imagined the lightning exchange of cash bets as watching MPs behaved much like the hyped-up midnight crowd in one of those underground Chinese insect-fighting contests. According to some reports, the Labour leader was “puce” and “rattled” when he confronted Johnson for accusing him of having called for the UK not to leave the European Medicines Agency. Alas, subsequent accounts featured a Labour MP denying he had had to hold Starmer back – and in any case by that stage the Labour leader had formally apologised for wrongly thinking that Johnson had claimed he had wanted to join the EU vaccine programme. Ah well. I guess it’s fitting that the Labour leader has finally mildly lost his rag in a misunderstanding over the European Medicines Agency and the EU’s vaccine programme. And no doubt he ran the full gamut of emotions from shirty to tetchy. Unfortunately, the fact Starmer had to apologise for having been the one in the muddle guarantees he won’t take such a sensationally daring risk ever again. All of which brings us to the question: where is the British public at with Keir Starmer? Speaking for myself, I would say that I definitely get he can give sober and detailed university lectures in archaeology. But what most of the movie needs to be, if enough people are going to watch it, is him successfully outrunning a massive boulder hurtling down the tunnel after him. Can he outrun a boulder? As always in the Labour party, any leading man – it’s always a man – has to deal with a lot of poison darts being blown at them by their own side. Thus this week there has been much ranting that Starmer’s Labour is planning to do one of those many political phrases I never understand, and “wrap itself in the flag”. I’d rather it attached itself to some jump leads, but there you go. That said, not hating your country isn’t the category-five alarm bell that Jeremy Corbyn’s OnlyFans subscribers seem to think it is. There are a lot of those people still trying to style out the fact that following an actual nerve agent attack on British soil their absolute boy literally suggested sending Russia a sample of the aforementioned chemical weapon “so that they can say categorically one way or the other”. That was one of the moments at which the 2019 electoral bed was shat, and the inability of some to even discuss it, let alone have a serious WTF-laden laugh at it, is one of the reasons they have to fantasise the red wall was lost because of whimsical Guardian columns like this one. (I heard they talked of nothing else but my Boris Johnson insults on the doorstep.) Whether Labour’s so-called flag-and-family strategy will work, or even happen, remains to be seen. Either way, Starmer has a tendency to feel like the embodiment of the famously passionless, lawyerly answer Michael Dukakis gave in a 1988 US presidential debate when asked if he’d support the death penalty if his wife Kitty were raped and murdered. Though everyone knew he was against the death penalty, Dukakis’s response was immediately held to be so emotionless as to have finished his campaign there and then. I keep wondering if Starmer comes across as another version of that answer. After all, if the past few years have taught us anything … wait, if the past few decades have taught us anything … come to that, if a simple trip on the Friday night bus has taught us anything, it is this: Britain is a majority-nutter nation, and we mostly want to elect politicians with something of the nutter to them. Sorry, but that’s the reality. As a voting body, our longest electoral affections have been reserved for the very biggest nutters. Thatcher and Blair: obvious nutters. Fast-forward to the present day, and Johnson. Nutter. The message of the 2016 referendum was the euphoric nutting of David Cameron (non-nutter). In fact, let me go out on a limb here and posit that the reason Jeremy Corbyn – full nutter – did better than expected against useless anti-nutter Theresa May in 2017 was simply because he WAS full nutter, and the electorate was at some level strangely drawn to that. Corbyn was always going to fall short, of course, because he was the wrong kind of nutter. He was not a kindred nutter. As for May, her campaign’s obsession with control, competence and the avoidance of risk was anathema. She parked the bus (sometimes literally, at campaign events held in empty hangars). Nobody wants to watch that. Certainly, not enough did to prevent the result sealing her eventual fate down the line. The worry for Labour is that, in its own way, watching Starmer is just like watching May, or maybe José Mourinho without the eye-gouging. Labour’s shadow cabinet feels like a back six, or even a back eight. In fact, everyone on the pitch always seems to be tracking back. It’s worth bearing in mind that the default preferred metric by which the England football side will always be judged by the fans is: did they play with enough passion? Did they play on even as their head bandage seeped with blood? Do they understand what it “means” to pull on “the shirt”? Given all that, it’s hard to surrender fully to Keir Starmer’s apparent conviction that what the Great British PublicTM are crying out for is calmness and competence, even if that’s what we collectively tell the pollsters. I mean, we tell the doctors we drink 14 units a week. Arguably, then, the riskiest position of all is this conviction that a technocratic dream of adequacy rocks the UK’s electoral boat. It’s certainly pretty to think so. But hand on heart, I suspect that even when the nutter of the day has cocked it up, what the nutter-addicted people are always really crying out for is just another nutter, a different nutter, a new nutter to bathe us in nostalgia for whichever previous nutters we currently yearn for. The dopamine-mainlining era of social media has only turbocharged this. We now demand 20 nutters a news cycle – and get 40. Or, to transpose this one into another arena entirely, have you seen the epic parish council meeting video that went viral this week? No doubt the Handforth parish council’s many factionalisms and furies have still to play out, but I fear I can tell you right now who’s ultimately going to lose the battle over whatever it is they’re fighting about: Jackie Weaver. Why? Because she’s not a nutter. Listen, I don’t make the rules. But it’s a long old road – and in a scientific eight out 10 cases, the nutters inherit the Earth. Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnist