Richard Bentall’s thoughtful piece (Has the pandemic really caused a ‘tsunami’ of mental health problems?, 9 February) resonates with our own Mental Health in the Pandemic study. Since March 2020, we have found similar evidence of how unequally UK adults are being affected by the pandemic, which is entrenching and exacerbating pre-existing inequalities. Our data also supports Prof Bentall’s point that economic threats are particularly harmful to people’s mental health. Our studies of the pandemic are the latest in a vast body of evidence showing that poverty and unemployment are emotionally devastating. They have long-term, intergenerational effects on individual, family and community wellbeing, and on the functioning of whole societies and economies. We hope that the government can tailor its policies to help protect people against fundamental stressors such as running out of food, heating, money – and being evicted. It’s time for ministers to work across departmental boundaries and act on the evidence, understanding that preventing distress and inequality is far better than hoping our NHS and social care systems can help everyone who becomes desperate. Dr Antonis Kousoulis Mental Health Foundation, Prof Tine Van Bortel De Montfort University and University of Cambridge, Prof Ann John Swansea University • In seeking to dispel the myth of an impending potential “tsunami” of psychological problems among “ordinary people”, Richard Bentall risks diminishing the “tornado” currently blowing through the care of people with severe mental health problems. People with schizophrenia living in the community have suffered from limitations on face-to-face contact with mental health professionals and others, almost certainly causing higher rates of relapse and hospital admission since the pandemic began, and inpatient mental health care has become even more restrictive because of Covid-imposed changes. In consequence, there is a serious risk that fewer people with schizophrenia will live independently post-pandemic, and institutional care will rise. Parity between mental and physical healthcare demands that health policy, funding and resources should now focus on the needs, current and post-pandemic, of the severely mentally ill. Bentall says: “When additional resources are available for mental health services, they should be directed to those who are most vulnerable.” But this matter is too urgent and too important to be left until additional resources are available. Dr Graham Ash Former NHS consultant psychiatrist • I find it difficult follow Prof Richard Bentall’s suggestion that having one in four adults in the UK “doing badly” with their mental health throughout the pandemic “does not look like a tsunami”. The notion that millions of adults with moderate to severe symptoms is not an overwhelming amount in the context of current mental health provision is bizarre. Whether the symptoms arise from exposure to the virus or from the economic effects of the pandemic is a distinction that makes no difference to the totals, or to the mental health of those badly affected. The government’s response and the additional resources it makes available for mental health services can make the difference. Hopefully, the outlook will not prove as bleak as the “tsunami narrative” implies. John Culley Barcombe, East Sussex