Hopes that UK leaders will be able to begin easing lockdown restrictions within weeks have been given a boost as official estimates suggest the number of new Covid cases is shrinking by 2% to 5% a day. The Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) said the reproduction or R number had fallen below 1 for the first time since July and was now estimated to be between 0.7 and 0.9 across the UK. Sage’s analysis found that as the lockdown bears down on transmission, the number of new infections is shrinking by 2-5% a day. The promising data was welcomed in No 10, though allies of Boris Johnson have repeatedly stressed his determination to move cautiously to avoid having to order new restrictions if the virus takes off again. “It’s not that the PM doesn’t really want to unlock, but it would be painful to the point of cruelty to inflict another reversal on people,” said a Downing Street source. Johnson has promised to publish a roadmap in the week starting 22 February, setting out whether all schools can open as hoped on 8 March and when other sectors could follow. Conservative MPs who have pressed hard for schools to reopen believe the 8 March date is now all but certain. Prof Neil Ferguson, who advises the government as part of the New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats advisory group (Nervtag), said England was “in a better place than I might have anticipated a month ago”. He told Politico’s Westminster Insider podcast: “The lockdown has really driven down cases quite fast.” He said the government might have the “bandwidth” to reopen at least primary schools as planned. “And if we continue to see then a continued decline without large outbreaks, then perhaps starting to relax other aspects of society the following month.” Johnson said earlier this week that he could not yet be sure of the impact of the mass vaccination programme on infections and deaths, but he hoped it would be clearer in the coming days. Non-essential shops are expected to follow schools in being allowed to open, and hospitality after that, with hopes that pubs and restaurants could be welcoming customers again by May. Ferguson said that if the situation played out according to the best estimates, much of England could be in the equivalent of tier 2 measures by May, and areas with very low incidence in tier 1. Johnson has said he would like to proceed with lifting restrictions on a nationwide basis if the data allows. The rate of new infections is one of the factors ministers have said will inform decisions about easing the rules, together with hospitalisations, deaths and evidence about new variants of the disease. Tory backbenchers in the Covid Recovery Group are calling on Johnson to be bold in reopening the economy. But the government’s scientific advisers, and more cautious ministers including Michael Gove and Matt Hancock, are pressing for a gradual approach, allowing cases to be pushed down to a much more manageable number before life returns to normal. “What we are aiming to do is get it down to very low numbers,” said a Department of Health source. The health select committee chair, Jeremy Hunt, has suggested the number of cases that would allow for effective contact-tracing and isolation to take place could be as low as 1,000 a day. There were 15,144 new cases reported on Friday. Some restrictions, such as guidance on social distancing and mask wearing, are likely to remain in place until all adults are vaccinated – something the government has said should take place by September – or perhaps longer, if new variants of the virus continue to emerge. Sage based its analysis on the latest data available up to 8 February, including hospital admissions and deaths, as well as symptomatic testing and prevalence studies. It estimates the R value is below 1 in all NHS regions of England. “However, prevalence of the virus remains high, so it remains important that everyone continues to stay at home in order to keep the R value down, protect the NHS and help save lives,” it said. The latest data from the Office for National Statistics (ONS) suggests that about one in 80 people in England had the disease in the week ending 6 February, and one in 85 in Wales, one in 75 in Northern Ireland and one in 150 in Scotland. The week before the figures were one in 65, one in 70, one in 65 and one in 115 respectively. Within England, the percentage of people testing positive has decreased in all regions except for the south-west, where the rate appears to have levelled off – although it remains lower than in most other English regions, and some areas of the south-west have the lowest rates of all. The report said caution should be taken in over-interpreting any small movements in the trends. London had the highest percentage of people testing positive, estimated at 1.6% on 6 February, but pockets of the West Midlands, the east of England and the north-west also had high rates.