The pop singer Rihanna has provoked the ire of the Indian government after wading into the debate over protests by farmers in the country, just as heavy police security and “war-like” barricades continue to be built up at demonstration sites around Delhi. This week, authorities began cracking down on the hundreds of thousands of farmers camped out on the Delhi border since November. Police embarked on a heavy fortification of three camps in Ghazipur, Tikri and Singhu, erecting layers of concrete barriers, digging trenches, putting up barbed-wire fences and cementing iron nails in the roads, in effect cutting off entry and exit to the sites. Water and food supplies to the protesting farmers have been disrupted and paramilitary troops and police in riot gear have been deployed to all three sites. Access to mobile internet was also suspended at the sites up until Tuesday evening after a government order. Those at the protest sites said the intensified fortification was a sign that the government regarded farmers as “criminals”. “The government treats us like thieves but we are fighting for our rights,” said Harbachan Singh, 60, a farmer from Tarn Taran, Punjab, who is managing a community kitchen at the Singhu border. The farmers are demanding the repeal of three new agricultural laws they say were passed by the government without their consultation and leave them at the mercy of big corporations. The farmers say the reforms, which will allow big retailers to buy directly from growers, will mean the end of long-standing guaranteed prices for their crops and leave them vulnerable to the whims of big business. Narendra Modi’s government, which has offered some concessions but ruled out abandoning the laws, says they will benefit farmers and draw investment to a sector that makes up nearly 15% of India’s $2.9tn economy and employs about half its workforce. The draconian shift in tactics against the protests followed a march by the farmers last week on India’s Republic Day that turned violent when thousands of protesters, many on tractors and horseback, burst through police barriers around Delhi borders and entered the city centre. Many stormed the historic Red Fort, while one farmer died in the violence and 500 police officers were injured. In a tweet to her 100 million followers, Rihanna wrote: “Why aren’t we talking about this?!”, in reference to a news report about the heavy-handed measures being used against the protesting farmers. Several hours after Rihanna’s tweet, the Swedish environmental activist Greta Thunberg, who has 4.6 million followers, also waded in, tweeting: “We stand in solidarity with the #FarmersProtest in India.” The Indian government appeared to be angered by the celebrity attention on the protests, and in an unusual step, issued a statement that did not directly mention Rihanna or Thunberg but criticised foreign individuals for “rushing to comment on such matters” without a “proper understanding of the issues”. “The temptation of sensationalist social media hashtags and comments, especially when resorted to by celebrities and others, is neither accurate nor responsible,” said the statement by the ministry of external affairs. The Indian government also threatened Twitter with legal action on Wednesday after the social media platform unblocked most of the 250 accounts which the electronics and information technology ministry had reported for using the hashtag #ModiPlanningFarmerGenocide and tweeting allegedly “fake, intimidatory and provocative tweets” connected to the farmer protests. The decision by Twitter to temporarily suspend the 250 accounts, including those of the Indian independent news magazine Caravan, the political commentator Sanjukta Basu, the activist Hansraj Meena and the actor Sushant Singh had led to accusations Twitter was silencing dissenting voices on behalf of the Indian government. After the accounts were restored, a statement from the Indian government accused Twitter of violating its authority and said the social media company “cannot assume the role of court and justify non-compliance”.