Abby Young-Powell Fri 5 Feb 2021 15.26 GMT


Last modified on Fri 5 Feb 2021 15.29 GMT Students learn a lot from their teachers. But teachers learn from their students and time in the classroom, too. New teachers in particular gain skills and experience every day, learning much about the profession and themselves in the process. We spoke to newly qualified teachers around the country to find out why they went into teaching, what they love about the job, and what they have learned so far. ‘You can’t always plan’ – Kei Matsumoto, 29, is a maths teacherTeaching was always at the back of my mind when I was at school. I went travelling and when I came back I got a job as a teaching assistant and that got me into the school environment. It was the first time I really enjoyed going to work, so I knew it was right for me. I did a PGCE at Bath Spa University and qualified in June last year. What I enjoy about teaching is that every day is different. You really have to go with the flow. This year the pandemic has taught me that you can’t always plan too far ahead. You don’t know who will be missing and who will be quarantining. I’ve learned to have an open mind and to be prepared for anything. I’ve also learned that I really enjoy working in a school and with students. Young people are hilarious and there are lots of funny moments throughout the day. Having a full-on job where things change all the time is good for me. It’s a really interesting job and my colleagues are very supportive. I learned that you can bring your interests and life experience into the classroom and pass them on to the students, too. For example, I’m from Japan and so students learn a bit about the culture from me. There are lots of different sides to teaching, so if you’re thinking about going into it, I’d say keep an open mind and see what it’s like for yourself. ‘Teaching is emotional. I was bombarded with thank you cards’ – Tanzil Gibbons, 24, has just finished his teacher trainingI knew I wanted to work with young people, children and families, and particularly with vulnerable children to help give them opportunities they wouldn’t have otherwise. Teaching, it turns out, was the natural choice as education opens up so many doors. I studied law at the University of the West of England, and was then inspired to go into teaching by a “train to teach” event that I attended. It seemed to be where I could have an impact, and I went on to qualify as a teacher. There’s been a lot to learn. Every day is different and children are both easy and difficult to work with in equal measure. I’ve discovered that teaching is an ongoing challenge. It’s a rewarding job and there’s a sense of fulfilment, especially if you want to do things for other people. It’s also emotional. For example, when I left my placement school in December I received so many thank you cards from the students and parents that it was really touching. You are emotionally invested in the children, families, in the school, and in yourself. I bring myself into the classroom, from the way I talk, to the stories I tell. It’s definitely a job you can be yourself in. I’ve learned that I’m really resilient and that I can be inspirational to others. I plan to keep learning; it’s a profession where new ideas and theories come out about different ways of teaching, so you can continue with professional development throughout your career. ‘You need motivation and enthusiasm, just like the students’ – Min Ji Lee, 24, is a maths teacher in GloucestershireWhile I was studying maths at University College London, I worked as a tutor to several schoolchildren. Until then, I had no idea how much I enjoyed teaching others. I realised that I wanted to help more students, including those who couldn’t afford tuition, so I applied to Teach First in my final year. I’m now in my second year of teaching and it has been a sharp learning curve. I’ve learned so much about myself. I’ve learned that I can be confident. As a person I’m not always confident, for example I would hate to do a public speech. But with teaching you’re giving a presentation every lesson and I can do that. I’ve also learned that patience is important. What I like most about teaching is building relationships with students. They trust you as a teacher. If you’re thinking about going into teaching, I’d say you don’t have to know everything from the start. You’re teaching, but you’re learning on the job, too. You need motivation and enthusiasm to learn, just like you see in your students. ‘It’s important to know yourself well. I put time into making sure I’m OK’ – Tommy Ekers, 25, teaches at a primary schoolI didn’t go straight into teaching after uni – I worked as a teaching assistant and then at an outdoor education centre. Over time, I started to realise how much I enjoyed working with young people and being able to do different activities every day. After studying environmental science at the University of York, I spent seven months working part time as a gardener and part time as a teaching assistant. I then moved to the outdoor education centre where school groups would come for a week at a time. We’d take the pupils on long walks, talk about natural habitats, and play games on the beach. Next I went to Spain where I was a language assistant at a school. After that, I knew I was ready to become a teacher and went on to complete my PGCE. I’ve been teaching for a year and a half now and it’s been a disruptive time because of the pandemic. I’ve learned about organisation and resilience, and how to support children’s emotional needs. It’s important to know yourself well. I put time into making sure I’m OK. Life outside of work is really important to me so I always ensure I have time in the evenings to switch off by reading or listening to a podcast. I also have at least one full day on the weekend for myself: when things are normal, I like climbing, surfing, walking, seeing friends/family. I genuinely care about the people I work with and love working with my students. It helps that I’m used to being around kids and building relationships with them because I’ve got three older sisters and they all have children. I can tell that I’ve got steadily better at what I do – and that feels rewarding. At school, I enjoy sharing my love of the outdoors. Before the lockdowns, I did things like building bug hotels or dens with students. We did some gardening, like planting potatoes. Those fun, creative, outdoorsy things are my favourite moments. I can’t wait to get back to it all. ‘You have to keep adapting’ – Chloe Carrubba, is an English teacher Initially, I wanted to be an actor or a musician. After university, I taught singing workshops abroad and someone told me I was a really good teacher. That helped me realise I enjoyed teaching and working with young people so much that I wanted to make a career out of it. I did my PGCE in English at Plymouth Marjon University and have now started teaching in probably the most challenging year that we’ve seen for a long time. There have been some high points and at times it has been stressful. Overall, I’ve probably had the best start a newly qualified teacher could have, though, because everything from now on is going to be easier. One of the main things I’ve learned about teaching is that you have to keep growing and adapting; I’m still reading around the subject and finding more layers to Romeo and Juliet, for example. The job is challenging, but you grow as a result of that, so it’s a good thing. There’s lots of room for progression – so be prepared to never stop learning. Overall, it’s the most rewarding thing I’ve done in my life and I couldn’t imagine doing anything else. In teaching every day is different, and so is every teacher. Discover 100 teachers across the country, shaping lives. And if you’d like to know how you can bring your individual passions to a job in teaching, head to Get Into Teaching to find out more.