1) There was not much to enjoy for England fans in their second Test defeat to India in Chennai, but the performance of wicketkeeper Ben Foakes was something to hold on to. In addition to a fine first innings, the Surrey gloveman produced a stunning stumping to remove Rohit Sharma. Foakes’ opposite number Rishabh Pant was not to be outdone, though. Foakes has put together a wicketkeeping masterclass, if you want to learn a thing or two. Moeen Ali also impressed with bat and ball, smashing five sixes in England’s final innings. 2) Six Nations highlights: Jonny May goes over against Italy in spectacular fashion, while Anthony Watson shows an incredible turn of pace. The entirety of Scotland v Wales was a ruddy good watch, and you can watch all the best tries of the weekend here. Speechless...Can anyone help an admin out with some superlatives?#ENGvITA #GuinnessSixNations #ITVRugby pic.twitter.com/7n5tLppwUJ 3) The Australian Open has witnessed players finding their form and feet, including Novak Djokovic who produced some incredible tennis in his match against Alexander Zverev. Nick Kyrgios got the home crowd going with this underarm serve, while women’s finalist Naomi Osaka had a few issues with a butterfly. 4) Referee Darren Drysdale has apologised after appearing to square up to Ipswich forward Alan Judge in their goalless draw with Northampton Town. Mr Drysdale is certainly not the first official to give as good as he gets. 5) Goals of the week: Al-Hudood’s Joseph Nathaniel has a foot like a traction engine, whereas Manchester City’s Caroline Weir is a touch more cultured. Additionally, we think this lad might have a chance of making it in the game: 📅 16.02.2021The night Kylian Mbappé rocked up at Camp Nou, and went home with all the headlines 🤩Just the third player to score a Champions League hat-trick against Barcelona 🌟 pic.twitter.com/IIVEsFGUXn 6) Welsh snooker legend Doug Mountjoy died this week at the age of 78. Mountjoy didn’t turn pro until he was 34 but went on to reach the 1981 Crucible final, while also showcasing his skills on the BBC’s popular Pot Black programme. His career highlight came in 1988, when he beat Stephen Hendry in the UK Championship final at the age of 46. RIP. 7) There was drama as Marta Bassino and Katharina Liensberger raced to a dead heat in the parallel giant slalom at the FIS alpine world ski championships. It was, however, not the most exciting thing to happen at Cortina. 1) Wasim Akram at his best. 2) The Slabs, the making of. 3) Some 1958 Pathé footage of female motorbike enthusiasts at Silverstone. Spotters’ badgers: Salsiccia, Sir Kirby, whobroughtoranges Do subscribe, if you fancy. Do subscribe, if you fancy.