Jonny May has warned of the dangers of being distracted by the looming British & Irish Lions tour as England begin the defence of their Six Nations title against Scotland in front of Warren Gatland on Saturday. May and his England teammates were given a glimpse of life in the Lions squad last week when they had their picture taken in the famous red jersey – as all four teams do every four years. May was overlooked four years ago but as one of the world’s leading wings he is a strong contender for the summer’s tour of South Africa. Questions marks still remain over whether the tour will go ahead, or in what format, but Gatland will begin his scouting mission at Twickenham this weekend, after returning to the UK from his native New Zealand. May has admitted that it would be a dream come true to be selected to face the Springboks but acknowledged England cannot let their minds wander with Scotland arriving at Twickenham for the first time since the spectacular 38-38 draw two years ago. “It’s always a strange day when we come in and do our photos with the Lions kit on,” said May. “That feels a bit weird. I don’t really like doing that. It does feel a bit strange putting on a shirt that you haven’t earned yet. But you get it done and try to get back to what you’re doing, which at the moment is trying to play for England, get better and prepare for a Test match at the weekend. “It’s human nature to want things. Of course what a lovely thought that is, it would be a dream come true to go on a Lions tour. It’s something you dream of doing as a kid. Of course you want to be a part of that. You get it done and try to get back to what you’re doing, which at the moment is trying to play for England, get better and prepare for a Test match at the weekend.” Eddie Jones will announce his starting XV to face Scotland on Thursday with a back-row replacement for the injured Sam Underhill among his key decisions. Jack Willis was thought to be under strong consideration while the loosehead prop Beno Obano looks in line for a place in the 23 for the first time. Jones may also opt to sacrifice George Ford for the running threat of either Paolo Odogwu or Ollie Lawrence in midfield.