Matt Hancock has set out tough new measures to stop Covid-19 variants from entering England, including a 10-year sentence for incoming passengers who lie about where they have travelled when abroad. The health secretary said people who entered the UK from 33 high-risk countries would have to pay up to £1,750 to quarantine in government-designated hotels. He also confirmed a new “enhanced testing” regime for all international travellers, with two tests required during the quarantine process from next Monday. The announcement came after weeks of criticism of the government by Labour for failing to impose tests or compulsory quarantine on passengers arriving from countries with new variants of Covid-19 or high R rates. Addressing the Commons, Hancock said the government had contracted 16 hotels with 4,600 rooms initially for those entering the country, a number that would be expanded soon. Anyone attempting to conceal that they had been in one of the “red list” destinations in the 10 days before arrival would face a prison sentence of up to 10 years, Hancock said. The red list countries include most of South America, southern Africa, Portugal and the United Arab Emirates. “People will need to remain in their rooms and of course will not be allowed to mix with other guests and there will be visible security in place to ensure compliance alongside necessary support, so even as we protect public health we can look after the people in our care. People who flout these rules are putting us all at risk. “Passenger carriers will have a duty in law to make sure that passengers have signed up for these new arrangements before they travel, and will be fined if they don’t, and we will be putting in place tough fines for people who don’t comply,” Hancock said. People arriving in the UK already need a negative test at least 72 hours before they start their journey. Non-UK resident travellers from red list countries have already been banned from entering. The government would go further from next Monday, with new rules being established in England and separate measures in Scotland and Wales, Hancock said. Anyone arriving in the UK from 15 February will need to get PCR tests on days two and days eight after isolating on arrival, in addition to the pre-flight tests already required. Hancock said they would have to book these tests online via a portal going live on Thursday. If they test positive, they will have to quarantine for a further 10 days. He also announced a £1,000 fine for international arrivals who failed to take mandatory test and a £5,000 penalty rising to £10,000 for anyone failing to quarantine in their designated hotel. Passengers required to stay in a quarantine hotel will need to reserve a room online in advance, and the booking system for quarantine hotels opens on Thursday, the health secretary said. The £1,750 fee for an individual includes the hotel, transfer and testing. These travellers would only be allowed to enter the UK through a “small number of ports that currently account for the vast majority of passenger arrivals”, Hancock said. Labour’s Jonathan Ashworth, the shadow health secretary, told MPs the government’s plans did not go far enough because half the countries where the South African variant had been identified were not included on the red list. “Our first line of defence is surely to do everything we can to stop [new variant] arising in the first place. That means securing our borders to isolate new variants as they come in. He’s announced a detailed package today but he hasn’t announced comprehensive quarantine controls at the borders. “So why then when over half of the countries where the South Africa variant has been identified – why are over half of them not on the so-called red list?” he said. Hancock also came under pressure from senior Conservatives to spell out when the government might lift the measures, which will have severe implications for the travel and hospitality industries. Mark Harper, the former minister who chairs the Covid Recovery Group, which represents Tory backbenchers pushing for an end to the lockdown, asked when the new regulations would end. Hancock said the measures could not remain in place forever but went on to suggest that the lifting of the restrictions would be linked to the performance of the vaccines against new variants. “If we get good news on the vaccination impact on hospitalisations and deaths from people who have ... new mutations, then we will be in a better place. If we do not get such good news, then we will need to use the updated vaccines to protect against the variants of concern,” he said.