 Tue 23 Feb 2021 15.34 GMT How to choose a wine? Colour, obviously. Price. Food and mood. Occasion and season. Maybe you’ve got a favourite grape or region. Maybe you don’t, and you pick by the label picture or tasting note. Or perhaps you’ve got your fallbacks, a handful of favourites you could sniff out with your eyes shut. Whether you’re a seasoned swashbuckling wine explorer or prefer to swim in the shallows of the wines you know, a little help can go a long way if you want to expand your wine horizons. After all, there’s a whole world of wine out there, from the high-altitude desert vineyards of Mendoza, land of the malbec, to the steep banks of Portugal’s Douro river. As with all proper adventuring, exploring far-flung wines can be daunting. Thankfully, Tesco is here to help with the decision-making – giving away 50 wine and nibbles gift boxes, handpicked by its in-house wine experts, who circle the globe sourcing and blending every new wine and vintage in the range. Created specifically to make exploring new wine easy, each bespoke box features a variety of grapes and regions, both classic wines and more adventurous bottles – helping you experiment without the in-aisle angst. To enter, simply fill in your details below. From familiar favourites and brilliant brands, to exceptional wines created with the Finest winemakers – there’s the perfect pairing for every food, mood, reason and season at Tesco. Explore the range at Tesco.com 1 The Tesco Finest wine prize draw (the “Prize Draw”) is open to residents of the UK aged 18 and over. 2 The Prize Draw is not open to employees or agencies of Guardian News & Media Limited (“GNM” or the “Promoter”), their group companies or family members, freelance contributors to GNM, or anyone else connected to the Prize Draw. 3 Entrants into the Prize Draw shall be deemed to have accepted these Terms and Conditions. 4 To enter the Prize Draw you must fill out the attached form/fields with your full name and email address. No purchase is necessary. If you have any questions about how to enter or otherwise in connection with the Prize Draw, please email alex.frayne@theguardian.com with “Tesco Finest Wine Prize Draw” in the subject line. 5 Only one entry per person. Entries on behalf of another person will not be accepted and joint submissions are not allowed. You are responsible for the cost (if any) of sending your Prize Draw entry to us. The winners shall be the owner of the email addresses from which the selected winning entries are sent. 6 GNM accepts no responsibility for entries that are lost, delayed, misdirected or incomplete or cannot be delivered or entered for any technical or other reason. Proof of delivery of the entry is not proof of receipt by GNM. 7 The Prize Draw opens at 12 noon on 23 February 2021 and closes at 23:59 on 14 March 2021. Entries received outside this time period will not be considered. 8 The winners will receive one Tesco Finest wine and nibble gift box. Only one winner per household. GNM accepts no responsibility for any costs associated with the prize that are not expressly included in the prize. You may be asked to show proof of age by the courier if you look under 25. Anyone unable to demonstrate proof of age (over 18) will not be given the prize and an alternative winner will be selected. 9 The winners will be selected by way of a random draw from all entries received in accordance with these Terms and Conditions. The draw will take place on or after 15 March 2021. 10 The winners will be notified by email on or after 15 March 2021 and given details of how to claim their prize. If a winner does not respond to GNM within 14 days of being notified of their win, the winner’s prize will be forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to select another winner in accordance with the process described above (and that winner will have to respond to notification of their win within 14 days or else they will also forfeit their prize). If a winner rejects their prize or the entry is invalid or in breach of these terms, the winner’s prize will be forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to select another winner. 11 The prizes will be sent to the winners by 18 April 2021. 12 The name and county of the winners can be obtained after 18 April 2021 by sending a stamped addressed envelope to the following address: Alex Frayne, The Guardian Labs, Guardian News & Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. 13 The prizes are non-exchangeable, non-transferable and not redeemable for cash or any other prize. 14 GNM reserves the right to substitute the prize with an alternative prize of similar value in the event that the original prize offered is not available. 15 The winners may be required to take part in promotional activity related to the Prize Draw and the winner shall participate in such activity on the Promoter’s reasonable request. The winners consent to the use by the Promoter and its related companies, both before and after the closing date of the Prize Draw for an unlimited time, of the winner’s voice, image, photograph and name for publicity purposes (in any medium, including still photographs and films, and on the internet, including any websites hosted by the Promoter and its related companies) and in advertising, marketing or promotional material without additional compensation or prior notice and, in entering the Prize Draw, all entrants consent to the same. 16 The Promoter shall use and take care of any personal information you supply to it as described in its privacy policy, a copy of which can be seen at https://www.theguardian.com/help/privacy-policy, and in accordance with data protection legislation. By entering the Prize Draw, you agree to the collection, retention, usage and distribution of your personal information in order to process and contact you about your Prize Draw entry (including with a third party affiliate for the purpose of delivery), and for the purposes outlined in paragraph 12 above. 17 GNM accepts no responsibility for any damage, loss, liabilities, injury or disappointment incurred or suffered by you as a result of entering the Prize Draw or accepting the prize. GNM further disclaims liability for any injury or damage to your or any other person’s computer relating to or resulting from participation in or downloading any materials in connection with the Prize Draw. Nothing in these Terms and Conditions shall exclude the liability of GNM under law for fraud or fraudulent misrepresentation, or for death or personal injury resulting from its negligence. 18 GNM reserves the right at any time and from time to time to modify or discontinue, temporarily or permanently, this Prize Draw with or without prior notice due to reasons outside its reasonable control (including, without limitation, in the case of anticipated, suspected or actual fraud). The decision of GNM in all matters relating to the Prize Draw is final and no correspondence will be entered into. 19 GNM shall not be liable for any failure to comply with its obligations relating to this Prize Draw where the failure is caused by something outside its reasonable control. Such circumstances shall include, but not be limited to, weather conditions, fire, flood, hurricane, strike, industrial dispute, war, hostilities, political unrest, riots, civil commotion, inevitable accidents, supervening legislation or any other circumstances amounting to force majeure. 20 The Prize Draw and these Terms and Conditions will be governed by English law and entrants to the Prize Draw submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of the English courts. 21 Promoter: Guardian News & Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London, N1 9GU.