Guardian staff Thu 11 Feb 2021 00.15 GMT


Last modified on Thu 11 Feb 2021 01.07 GMT In their prosecution of Donald Trump for inciting the 6 January attack on the United States Capitol in Washington DC, Democratic impeachment managers have focused on videos of the event, including previously unseen footage. The managers, who act as prosecutors in the case, have shown clips to their audience of senators, who are in effect acting as jurors. The shocking footage shown on Wednesday revealed the full scale and danger of the attack on the Capitol, including threats to some senators who were now sitting in the chamber during the trial. Here are some of the key moments: Eugene Goodman, the US Capitol police officer who has already been hailed as a hero for his actions during the Capitol attack, was revealed to have also potentially saved the life of the Republican senator Mitt Romney. Video footage showed Goodman warning Romney that rioters were headed his way shortly after the building was breached by a mob of Donald Trump supporters. Prosecutors played the security footage from inside the Capitol on Wednesday, which showed Goodman running toward Romney to warn him that the Capitol had been breached. After encountering Goodman, Romney turned around and ran, saving the trenchant Trump critic from meeting the pro-Trump mob. Romney later said it was his first time seeing the footage of Goodman telling him to get to safety. “I look forward to thanking him,” he told reporters. WATCH: New footage shows Officer Eugene Goodman rush Sen. Mitt Romney away from the rioters https://t.co/rnCk9EvEDw pic.twitter.com/iIJIkV5VBJ Footage also showed rioters screaming and breaking into the Capitol. Some of the rioters grabbed fire extinguishers from the walls as they stormed through the hallways. “Where are they counting the votes?” they yelled. Goodman said: “Don’t do it. Don’t do it.” Goodman confronted the crowd with his hand raised toward them to stop. He then retreated up a staircase and they followed. Up the stairs, he directed them away from the Senate door and the chamber. The vice-president, Mike Pence, was about 100ft away with his family. Goodman was later honored by Congress for his heroics. EXPLICIT CONTENT >> Now playing of when mob meets Capitol Police Officer Goodman at the stairs...“WHERE THEY COUNT THE VOTES” and other expletives heard during the rage #ImpeachmentTrial @WUSA9 @CBSNews pic.twitter.com/jnZTjZxht1 Rioters at the Capitol were targeting the former vice-president, who refused to help his boss, Donald Trump, subvert the results of the 2020 election. In video shown Wednesday, rioters chanted “Hang Mike Pence!” and “Bring out Pence!” as they roamed the halls searching for the former vice-president and other lawmakers. Outside, the mob set up a makeshift gallows on the field near the Capitol. Rioters got as close as 100ft to Pence. Officer Eugene Goodman helped guide rioters away from where he was hiding. House impeachment manager Stacey Plaskett said on Wednesday: “You can hear the mob calling for the death of the vice-president of the United States.” Previously unseen security footage also showed Pence and his family being evacuated out of the Senate chamber. By the time Pence was evacuated, the insurrectionists were already inside the Capitol. Truly remarkable footage of Vice President Pence and his family being escorted out of the Senate chamber. President Trump was back at the White House, continuing to trash Pence, according to multiple people. pic.twitter.com/Vr3c5EBwTR Security footage shown by Stacey Plaskett, one of the Democratic impeachment managers, showed insurrectionists calling out for the House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, after entering the Capitol. In one clip, an insurrectionist said in a mocking voice, “Naaaaancy. Oh, Naaaaancy.” Plaskett also played audio of a Pelosi staffer calling for the help of Capitol police because the rioters were banging on the door of the speaker’s office. Shortly after the rioters entered the Capitol, Pelosi was evacuated to a secure location. Straight out of a horror film. Insurrectionist calling for Nancy Pelosi pic.twitter.com/itXdEpCOI1 Previously unseen footage and police dispatch calls laid bare the intensity of the 6 January violence. House Democrats showed footage of Trump’s supporters knocking down fences and fighting with police, and paired it with audio of officers making radio calls begging for backup. Prosecutors played police radio traffic in which officers described multiple injured officers, said “they’re throwing metal poles at us” and called for immediate reinforcements. After playing increasingly desperate calls from police, Democrats showed footage of rioters breaking down windows with a riot shield to climb into the Capitol. A never-before-seen security video from inside the Capitol showed rioters using a wooden beam to break windows and climb into the building. The first man climbing into the building was carrying a baseball bat and wearing body armor and was followed by a stream of people climbing through windows. One of the first people who entered the Capitol was carrying a Confederate flag. Impeachment managers play never-before-seen security footage from Capitol as rioters break through window on Senate side pic.twitter.com/nqWBvDPVlo