Brass Eye director Michael Cumming and comic Stewart Lee bring this charming and experimental documentary following Robert Lloyd, the lesser-known frontman of punk groups the Nightingales and the Prefects, as he recounts his four decades spent making music outside the mainstream. Famous fans such as Frank Skinner and Paul Morley recount Lloyd’s influence, while the legacy of a long-abandoned King Kong sculpture from Birmingham town centre provides an unusual parallel to his renown. Ammar Kalia With the likes of Sophie Ellis-Bextor, Martine McCutcheon and Mel B already out of the running to be crowned this season’s ultimate costumed singing champion, judges Jonathan Ross, Davina McCall, Rita Ora and Mo Gilligan guess along with us at who may be behind the remaining five outfits. AK This featherlight but fun series sees the savvy, down-to-earth Lindsay crash at some very expensive pads. She begins in Mayfair, central London, for caviar and cocktails with property power-couple Kam and Anya, who put her up in a covetable six-floor townhouse. Graeme Virtue The series snooping around royal abodes reaches Kensington Palace, home to extended members of the royal family. Anna Whitelock describes the botched construction of the building in the 17th century. Over at Windsor Castle, the effects of the 1992 fire can still be seen. AK There is a feeling of normality in the A&E department this week, with Faith recovering from her accident, Leon trying to fix the toaster in the staff room, and the paramedics called out to a domestic incident on a farm. Jan is dishing out advice too but is it what Fenisha needs to hear? Hannah Verdier Five weeks in and host Paul Sinha has already proven himself worthy of Noel Edmonds’s Telly Addicts mantle. Get the reference? That’s exactly the kind of trivia you’ll need to keep up with this week’s contestants, Tom Allen, Clare Balding, Russell Kane and AJ Odudu. Ellen E Jones In Fabric, 11.20pm, BBC Two Another brilliantly designed dose of weirdness from Duke of Burgundy creator Peter Strickland, a fetishistic horror in which downtrodden Marianne Jean-Baptiste’s blood-red dress, purchased from a very peculiar department store, spells bad news for everyone who comes across it. Simon Wardell Test Cricket: Pakistan v South Africa 4.50am, Sky Sports Cricket. Third day of the second Test. Premier League Football: Aston Villa v Arsenal 11.30am, BT Sport 1. Fulham v West Ham airs 5pm on Sky Sports Main Event. Six Nations Rugby Union: Italy v France 1.30pm, ITV. Followed by England v Scotland.