Chelsea’s manager, Emma Hayes, blasted the press for “manipulating my words” and attacked the use of “inflammatory language to infer that I’ve insulted AFC Wimbledon”, following reports of her comments on the alleged interest of the managerless League One team in her services. “Far from it,” said the frustrated Hayes. “What a wonderful club that are local to our community and one that’s dear to everyone’s hearts at Chelsea.” Speaking after a first Chelsea hat-trick for the European player of the year, Pernille Harder, helped the Blues cruise into the Continental League Cup final, with the 6-0 scoreline a record for a semi-final win, Hayes was keen to clarify her position. “First of all I need to say I’ve never spoken to Wimbledon, I’ve never been offered a job by Wimbledon. My words were this: it is not a step down to coach Chelsea women’s team, it’s an insult to suggest otherwise,” she said. “The point I was making yesterday is that football is for everyone. It’s not for the privileged, it’s not for the few, it’s not for the elite, football is represented by a diverse society and football does not represent the diverse society we live in. “I sincerely hope AFC Wimbledon find the right person for their football club. The whole point about them not being able to afford me has nothing to do with money, but everything to do with the fact that I’m in the best job in the world and no amount of money is going to tempt me away from that.” It took Hayes eight years to reach her first League Cup final with Chelsea last season. She took no chances, then, for West Ham’s trip to play the holders at Kingsmeadow, picking a strong starting XI. Hayes need not have worried too much, though, as the Hammers’ looked tangled as the relentless Chelsea attack weaved through their lines time and time again. The Blues were four up inside 27 minutes as two goals from Harder, a long-rang effort from Sophie Ingle and a tap in from Beth England punished the mistakes of the West Ham goalkeeper, Mackenzie Arnold. There were glimpses of Olli Harder’s vision for West Ham in the opening exchanges. The new manager would like to see his side press high and with urgency. However, there is a doggedness to Hayes’ side that means they will just not allow teams to try to play keep-ball against them. Perhaps fuelled by some intense half-time reflection the visiting team began the second half brightly. Two saves in two minutes for Arnold settled the goalkeeper’s nerves and the Hammers pushed forward as Chelsea lifted their foot off the gas. West Ham had three chances to reduce the gap in quick succession after the break, with Maz Pacheco, the new midfielder Lois Joel and the Australian Emily van Egmond all going close. But they were left ruing their wastefulness after Arnold got a hand to Hannah Blundell’s cross but it clipped off a post and bounced down for Fran Kirby to poke over the line at the far post. Harder completed her hat-trick at the close, dancing through defenders before firing in her Chelsea’s sixth. “We’ve just faced two of the best eight teams in the world, they’re on another level,” said new West Ham manager Olli Harder, after a 4-0 defeat to Manchester City on Sunday was followed by the drubbing in south-west London three days later. “It’s not a gap, it’s a chasm, it’s a huge difference in terms of the quality on the pitch and, as I talked about when I arrived, it’s our responsibility as a football club, and for all the other clubs in the league, to really narrow that chasm so we’re not having scorelines like this. That takes time. From what I’ve seen in four weeks I’ve been really happy with the progress we’ve made in terms of developing a culture and beginning to develop a style of play.”