Who’d be a drug dealer, eh? From The Wire to Narcos, via Breaking Bad and Traffic (or the 1989 British miniseries Traffik, on which it was based, if your memory extends that far), it always looks exhausting. So stressful. And, y’know, periodically fatal. This is particularly the case, perhaps, when you are at the top of the food chain, like the fellows organising the multimillion-dollar cocaine deal in ZeroZeroZero (Sky Atlantic). The eight-part limited series – one with final scenes that beg for a sequel – is based on a book by the Gomorrah writer Robert Saviano and follows the international travels of 5,000kg of drugs, as well as the travails of those whose lives and livelihoods depend on their successful delivery. It is part mafia saga, part crime thriller and part family drama. In the Calabrian mountains, Don Minu La Piana (Adriano Chiaramida), the teetering head of the organised crime syndicate the ’Ndrangheta, emerges from a bunker to gather potential buyers and organise a spectacular deal that – if successful – will restore his standing among them all. By the end of the first episode, it is clear that things are not going to go smoothly and that most of what you would expect from a mafia saga will come into play, from treacherous relatives to hungry, undiscerning pigs. Meanwhile, in Monterrey, Mexico, the cartel amasses the goods for sale, while Manuel Contreras (Harold Torres), a special forces sergeant and devout Catholic, decides that the best way to serve God is to put together a rogue unit and go to war against local corruption, however many bodies are eviscerated in the process. In the US, the Lynwoods – patriarch Edward, chip-off-the-old-block daughter Emma and sheltered son Chris (Gabriel Byrne, Andrea Riseborough and Dane DeHaan respectively), who is beginning to show signs of the Huntingdon’s disease that killed his mother – own a shipping firm that depends on the huge shipment to cure their financial woes and keep the family business – uh – afloat. They are $31m in the hole as they wait for the drugs to start moving out of Mexico and the first payment to arrive. It is like a nightmarish house-buying experience. Unbeknown to the Lynwoods, Don Minu’s grandson Stefano (Giuseppe De Domenico) is not the devoted scion he appears to be. In what I consider to be an unlikely move, even given the Italian love of dramatic gesture, he has burned the money collected for the purchase. He vows that the next body to be tipped into the pigsty will be his grandfather’s, kicking off a welter of local and global cat-and-mouse, double-crossing, tip-offs, treacheries, torture and killings, albeit at a surprisingly sedate – even languorous – pace. The grim unfoldings are humanised somewhat by the Lynwoods – especially by the relationship between Emma and Chris as they negotiate the hurdles presented by his illness and their father’s wish that she protect her brother from all things. It is also humanised by Manuel, although you have to bring a certain amount of willingness to read suffering on his compromised moral compass, as the bloodshed occasionally makes it hard to see. As Miss Jean Brodie might say, for those who like this sort of thing, this is the sort of thing they like. It is gorgeous to look at; it is brutal enough for a trafficking tale; and there is plenty going on. But it is methadone to the heroin of, say, Narcos. It lacks the emotional depth of Netflix’s hit, despite almost certainly being designed to compete with it. The streak of nihilism that runs through it militates against you caring much what happens to any of the groups or individuals involved. And you do need to care. You don’t need to like the characters – although one or two you could root for in some respect wouldn’t go amiss – but you need to be able to see them in the round. Most of them ape the title of the show, amounting to little more than ciphers. Maybe it is a way of suggesting the futility of the fight against drugs and trafficking – as Edward complacently assures the other dealers and brokers round the table at a meeting in Mexico, their business is what keeps the world economy afloat and therefore will never be meaningfully dismantled. But it tips the experience of watching into bleakness. Fictional narratives need resolution; any promised here is undercut by the suggestion that nothing ever really changes.