World Wide Waves (BBC World Service) | BBC SoundsJohn Keats: Life and After-Life (Radio 4) | BBC SoundsWorld of Curls (Radio 4) | BBC SoundsRelic Radio (relicradio.com) “The crackle of connection.” It is hard to think of a better description of the excitement and the purpose of radio. Maria Margaronis came up with it in presenting World Wide Waves on the World Service, which whisked around the globe to celebrate community radio stations. David Goren’s production was lyrical: on the shores of the Danube delta an 82-year-old sang in Ukrainian of his youth. It was sharply political, uncovering, to the sigh of pipes, the history of Bolivian radio as a defender of miners against dictators. It conjured strong pictures: fishermen in Tamil Nadu listen to radio station Kadal Osai (which means “the sound of the sea”) as they mend their nets. It surprised the ear: on KTNN, a DJ mingles American English with her native Navajo, and dispenses traditional lore: getting up late, she tells her early-morning listeners, “only brings poverty”. Most inspirational of all was Cameroon’s Radio Taboo, whose founder was tortured for his political cartoons, and who funds the rainforest station in part by body painting. Taboo, heard on mobiles and broadcasting in seven languages, lives up to its name: it has recently campaigned against the custom of young women flattening their breasts with hot stones to make themselves more attractive. This platform for debate is also a shelter: solar panels on the roof mean that at night the building is light enough for children to study there. Exam results are soaring. The most interesting documentaries are not always the most obviously steered; they can seem to form themselves by accumulation, like a murmuration of starlings. The first part of Beaty Rubens’s production John Keats: Life and After-Life (marking the 200th anniversary of the poet’s death) was a case in point. Sasha Dugdale, the presenter and herself a poet, was reflective rather than polemical. Focusing on 1819, the year of his great odes, she raised the programme’s central concern: that Keats abandoned his medical career in order to write. Musing how this might strike an age in which “vaccine counts for more than villanelles”, she introduced a crowd of witnesses and sounds that took the listener back, forward and within. Biographer Lucasta Miller looked at the poet’s London from his Hampstead home. Druin Burch, a doctor at the John Radcliffe hospital, Oxford, talked about the way the TB that killed Keats “stalked” a generation, and considered how Covid patients also sometimes “allow their breath to leave them”. Keats’s medical notes were unearthed. The music of another prematurely dead romantic, Schubert, haunted the background. There was no stern conclusion – Keats was, after all, the poet of “negative capability” – but there was a growing sense that his pen and his dissecting knife were not at war with each other. There was explosive affirmation of the power of these odes – their ability to inoculate us against despair – from Bob Geldof. His ardour was in fine balance with Dugdale’s poise. Keats, said Geldof, was the poet of love, and in love you “open yourself up like a surgeon to the thrill of being alive”. World of Curls is modest in length – five 14-minute episodes – but its slot, at the end of Woman’s Hour, repeated in the evening after Front Row, sends out a welcome signal about the changing look of Radio 4. Changes are overdue. What has happened to anyone without a white face in The Archers? The vicar’s daughter, Amy (she’s a midwife! she could deliver Alice’s baby!)? Kate’s kids? Usha? Are they all whimpering together in the sin bin known to Ambridge as Birmingham? Curls is created by theatre director Jade Lewis and actor-writer Yolanda Mercy, whose last play filled the Bridge. Set in a black hair salon in Peckham, south London, this miniseries waves at Inua Ellams’s all-male Barber Shop Chronicles. Yet though this establishment is also a confessional crucible, it has a female clientele and its own rich vocabulary of hair. The episodes – Relaxer, Weave, Locks, Shaved and Braids – follow the daily life of Ronkę (Ronkę Adékọluẹ́jọ), the proprietor: being seen at Yoruba prayers; being crazy about her doctor husband; being worried about a sulky daughter. Vivacious enough, but the drama takes off when it touches on dreamland. Teasing out a new style, Ronkę thinks of the memories it will give the wearer, and then of her own past twisting her young daughter’s tresses, decorating them with bobbles. A stylist looks into a dense thicket of hair and determines that she’ll find a path through the tangle: after all, Moses parted the Red Sea. Meanwhile, Relic Radio, with its menu of thrills from 40s and 50s US radio, is worth visiting for the Rocky Jordan adventures alone: frantic broads, big musical effects, and the Cafe Tambourine, “crowded with forgotten men, alive with the babble of many languages”. Like a radio archive.