It was a sight as common as birds chirping in trees or cars idling in traffic. Nobody would do a double-take when they saw children playing with their grandparents. That was before the pandemic, when it was simply a routine image of daily life and not a potentially fatal activity. But more and more, in playgrounds across Jerusalem, a grandparent can be seen strolling along while a grandchild rushes ahead to slides and climbing frames. In this city, most older people are vaccinated against Covid-19 and are slowly emerging from nearly a year of strict isolation. While still not advised by authorities, some are cautiously returning to the thing they missed the most. “The feeling is extraordinary,” said Yoel Silver, a 67-year-old lawyer, as he pushed his granddaughter on a swing. Twelve days before, Silver had received his second shot of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine, which initial data suggests gives a high level of resistance to the disease. For months he had mostly seen his 11 grandchildren on video calls. In a different park near the Old City of Jerusalem, another Israeli grandparent, Reuven Brauner, 70, said he and his wife had not socialised with friends but decided to visit their grandchildren after being immunised. “Our understanding is that we are in a much safer position. Not 100%, but we feel sufficiently confident in the vaccine. We decided to go out and see the family,” said Brauner, who wore a surgical mask over his grey beard as a precaution. His granddaughter, aged two, toddled around while her one-year-old brother lay in a pram nearby. Not being close to the younger grandchildren over the months had been especially hard, said Brauner. “They grow up so quickly at this age.” Israel is vaccinating its 9 million citizens at a higher rate than anywhere else. Close to 80% of people over 50 have received inoculations, and as of Thursday all people over 16 are eligible to receive a jab. The vaccination campaign has been the subject of intense global focus. Not only does it provide a test case for how the jabs work in the real world but it also exemplifies a highly unequal international vaccination push in which citizens of richer, more powerful nations will be first to see the benefits. While one in three Israelis has received a jab, Palestinians in the Israeli-controlled occupied territories are far behind. They are just now receiving the first batches of limited doses. Although Israel is leading the world in vaccinations, concerns remain around how much caution can be abandoned. The country is still under a lockdown, with relatively high daily infection figures. A health ministry official has advised grandparents to keep masks on and remain socially distanced from their grandchildren, warning the disease may still be transmitted by vaccinated people and keep the national infection rate high. Orli Shuruki, a 71-year-old from Jerusalem, has nine grandchildren and says she decided to get vaccinated because of them. “I felt I had enough. I couldn’t host my family. I could only see them through the window,” she said. Her middle-aged children have also been given shots, and they decided to get together for a Saturday lunch last week for the first time in months. “The grandchildren couldn’t remember when was the last time we gathered at home,” she said. “I think I had become depressed, and that is why I gained weight.” Shuruki said the family wore masks but took them off to eat, and split the tables to keep the households apart. Still, she allowed herself a brief embrace with her grandchildren. It was what the kids missed more than anything else, she said. “The hugs, only the hugs. They didn’t care about what I cooked for them, only the hugs.”