More than 150 New York Times staffers sent a letter on Wednesday to its executive leadership criticizing the paper’s response to complaints from parents that the journalist Donald McNeil Jr had used racist language while on a company-sponsored student trip, and for the handling of the scandal once those complaints were first reported. “Our community is outraged and in pain,” staffers wrote, adding that despite the paper’s “seeming commitment to diversity and inclusion, [they’ve] given a prominent platform – a critical beat covering a pandemic disproportionately affecting people of color – to someone who chose to use language that is offensive and unacceptable by any newsroom’s standards”. The letter called on the Times to investigate “any newly surfaced complaints”, noting that in the days since the allegations were first reported, current and former colleagues have spoken up about “bias against people of color in his work and in interactions with colleagues over a period of years”. “We, his colleagues, feel disrespected by his actions,” staffers wrote, adding they were “deeply disturbed” by how the paper addressed allegations. “The company has a responsibility to take that experience seriously.” Last week, the New York Times confirmed it had investigated and “disciplined” its high-profile public health and Covid-19 reporter after he used racial slurs during a trip with high school students in 2019, including using the N-word during a Times-endorsed educational trip to Peru. The reporter also suggested he did not believe in white privilege and used stereotypes about Black teenagers, according to complaints filed to the paper, which were first reported by the Daily Beast. The executive editor, Dean Baquet, however, insisted the investigation concluded that while the reporter allegedly used “offensive” language, and “showed extremely poor judgment”, McNeil’s “intentions were[n’t] hateful or malicious”. The signatories were not satisfied, calling such a conclusion “irrelevant”. They have demanded that leadership should conduct a more thorough investigation of the complaints against the 45-year veteran, as well as the Times’s initial handling of the situation. They have also called on McNeil to apologize to the students and their parents, tour staffers, as well as colleagues. “[Company guidelines] make clear that what matters is how an act makes the victims feel; [McNeil’s] victims weren’t shy about decrying his conduct on the trip,” the letter said. In response to the letter, Baquet – along with the chief executive, Meredith Kopit Levien, and publisher, AG Sulzberger – said late on Wednesday that they “appreciate the spirit in which [the letter] was offered and largely agree with the message”, vowing that the newsroom “will see the results”.