Former US Olympic gymnastics coach John Geddert, who had ties to disgraced team doctor Larry Nassar and was charged earlier on Thursday with human trafficking and sexual assault, has since taken his own life, authorities said. According to court documents filed in Michigan’s Eaton County, Geddert was charged with 20 counts of human trafficking, one count of first-degree sexual assault, one count of second-degree sexual assault, criminal enterprise and lying to a police officer. “My office has been notified that the body of John Geddert was found late this afternoon after taking his own life. This is a tragic end to a tragic story for everyone involved,” Michigan attorney general Dana Nessel said in a statement. Geddert’s attorney’s office confirmed to Reuters that he was deceased but declined further comment when asked about the circumstances surrounding his death. Geddert was coach of the women’s team known as the ‘Fierce Five’ that won gold at the 2012 Olympics in London and the former owner of the Lansing-area Twistars USA Gymnastics Club for elite athletes where Nassar treated gymnasts. The two sexual assault charges stem from an incident in 2012, court documents showed. “These allegations focus around multiple acts of verbal, physical and sexual abuse perpetrated by the defendant against multiple young women,” Nessel said in an earlier statement. “I am grateful for these survivors coming forward to cooperate with our investigation and for bravely sharing their stories.” According to the attorney general’s office, Geddert used his reputation as an Olympic-level coach and promised parents that he could turn his students into world-class athletes. The attorney general’s office said that under the guise of coaching, Geddert reportedly subjected multiple young women to an environment of continued abuse, in which he also neglected advice of medical doctors except that provided by Nassar, who served for around 20 years as Geddert’s team physician. Geddert was suspended by USA Gymnastics in January 2018. Former USA Gymnastics doctor Nassar has been given two prison sentences in Michigan of 40 to 125 years and 40 to 175 years for molesting young female gymnasts. He is also serving a 60-year federal term for child pornography convictions. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 800-273-8255. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.