Brentford recovered from a poor start to win 4-1 at Middlesbrough and climb into the top two in the Championship. Middlesbrough were 1-0 up inside three minutes when the Brentford goalkeeper David Raya failed to collect Neeskens Kebano’s cross. However, the visitors were level in the 38th minute when Ivan Toney tapped in after good work by Tariqe Fosu – and they took control after the break. Vitaly Janelt (58) fired home from the edge of the box after the top scorer Toney had headed the ball down for him, Mathias Jensen (64) made it 3-1 following a slip from Paddy McNair, before Toney tapped in the fourth 10 minutes from time. Bournemouth ended their poor run with a 3-2 home win over Birmingham, with Jack Wilshere scoring one and setting up another. The visitors were ahead in the 27th minute when Asmir Begovic spilled Gary Gardner’s cross and Scott Hogan cleaned up but Wilshere set up Arnaut Danjuma to level in the 36th minute. Wilshere headed the hosts ahead just past the hour mark and although Hogan headed an equaliser seven minutes later, Philip Billing decided the contest when he tapped in unmarked at the far post with 13 minutes remaining. The result leaves Birmingham in the bottom three. Curtis Nelson and Kieffer Moore got Cardiff’s goals in the 2-0 win at Bristol City to hand Mick McCarthy his first win since taking charge, while Millwall came from behind to defeat Sheffield Wednesday 4-1. Callum Paterson gave Wednesday a 10th-minute lead but Kenneth Zohore’s 39th-minute penalty levelled things up and Scott Malone (68), Ben Thompson (69) and Tom Bradshaw (90) completed the turnaround. New signing Glenn Murray impressed for Nottingham Forest in the 3-0 win at bottom club Wycombe. Murray lobbed the opener in the seventh minute and doubled the lead nine minutes into the second half from the penalty spot, after being fouled. Anthony Knockaert wrapped up the points in the 72nd minute. A 90th-minute goal from Jonny Smith on his debut helped bottom League One club Burton secure a shock 1-0 victory over high-flying Hull. Burton's deadline day signing from Bristol City made a big impact after coming on as a second-half substitute, collecting Josh Parker's cross before coolly sliding the ball past George Long. City's defeat means Lincoln stay top courtesy of a 3-0 win at Gillingham on Friday night while Doncaster drew level on points with Hull thanks to a 3-2 victory that ended Oxford's 13-match unbeaten run. Sunderland lost ground in the play-off race after being held to a 2-2 draw at MK Dons. James Bolton's last-gasp goal earned Portsmouth a point as Kenny Jackett's men scored twice in as many minutes to draw 2-2 with Plymouth. Wimbledon climbed out of the relegation zone with a 3-2 win over fellow strugglers Wigan at the DW Stadium, their first success in 12 matches. Simon Grayson's first game in charge of Fleetwood ended in disappointment as his team were held to a goalless draw at home by struggling Bristol Rovers. Joe Pritchard was sent off for Accrington Stanley for two yellow cards in their goalless clash with struggling Northampton. Charlton bounced back from their midweek home defeat by Portsmouth with a 2-0 victory at Rochdale, where both goals came before half-time from Chuks Aneke and Deji Oshilaja. Sammie Szmodics inspired a return to winning ways for Peterborough as they saw off Crewe 2-0, scoring one and helping create the second for leading scorer Jonson Clarke-Harris, his 16th goal of the season.A long-range strike from Blackburn loanee Harry Chapman was enough for Shrewsbury to see off relegation rivals Swindon 1-0 while goals either side of half-time from Alan Judge and Luke Woolfenden helped Ipswich to a 2-0 win over Blackpool. Yoann Barbet’s 54th-minute effort, QPR’s first goal at home since 1 December, proved enough to secure a 1-0 home win against Blackburn. Rotherham climbed out of the relegation zone with a 2-1 win at Preston. Joe Rafferty’s 10th-minute own goal and Ben Wiles’ 55th-minute effort had them 2-0 ahead at Deepdale, before Ched Evans replied 10 minutes later. James Collins gave Luton an 11th-minute lead at home to Huddersfield but Naby Sarr equalised in the 74th minute. The visitors’ Harry Toffolo was dismissed in injury time. Cambridge moved three points clear at the top of Sky Bet League Two with a 2-0 win at Barrow. With Forest Green Rovers' match away to Mansfield among four fixtures to fall foul of the weather, Cambridge took full advantage with goals from Paul Mullin and Joe Ironside. Wes Hoolahan teed up Mullin to fire in a powerful opener two minutes before the break while Ironside made sure of the points six minutes from time. With the match between Cheltenham and Carlisle postponed due to a coronavirus outbreak, Tranmere took their chance to move up into the automatic promotion places as a James Vaughan brace helped them to a 3-1 win over Port Vale. Newport are just one point further back in fourth place after a 1-0 win over Grimsby which came courtesy of debutant Nicky Maynard's 51st-minute strike. Morecambe missed out on fourth place as Luke Norris' late header earned Stevenage a 2-2 draw. The lunchtime kick-off saw Exeter twice come from behind to beat Bradford 3-2 to stay in the play-off places. Crawley's poor home form continued as 10-man Harrogate came away from the People's Pension Stadium with a 3-1 win. Leyton Orient and Colchester fought out a 0-0 draw at Brisbane Road in a game short on quality. Matches between Salford and Bolton, Scunthorpe and Oldham, and rock-bottom Southend and Walsall, were all called off due to waterlogged pitches. Reading’s promotion prospects were not helped by a 0-0 draw at Stoke and it was also goalless in the early kick-off between Coventry and Watford. Troy Deeney hit the woodwork late on but Watford failed to score for an eighth time on the road this season against draw specialists Coventry. Barnsley’s match against Derby was postponed after a midday pitch inspection at Oakwell, which followed incessant heavy rain.