A man and woman have been arrested on suspicion of murder after the death of a one-year-old boy they were going to adopt. The child was placed with his adoptive parents at the time of his death, but a final adoption order had not yet been granted by the court. Cumbria police said a 37-year-old woman and a 34-year-old man, from Barrow, were arrested on suspicion of murder and causing and allowing the death of a child. They were also held on suspicion of two counts of assault, ill treatment, neglect, or abandoning a child or young person to cause unnecessary injury. The pair were released on bail while detectives investigate the circumstances. DCSt Dean Holden, head of crime and safeguarding at Cumbria Constabulary, said: “Two people have been arrested as part of an ongoing investigation into the tragic death of a one-year-old boy in Barrow. “On 6 January, police received a report from NWAS [North West Ambulance Service] regarding an incident at a property in Barrow. “The child was transferred to Alder Hey children’s hospital from Furness general hospital for specialist medical care due to his critical condition. Sadly, the young boy passed away on the afternoon of 7 January. “An investigation is under way by a dedicated team of detectives and other specialists in order to establish the full circumstances of the death in full consultation with the coroner.” John Readman, executive director of people at Cumbria county council, said: “This is a deeply distressing case and our thoughts are with the little boy’s family. We can confirm that he was looked after by the local authority and at the time of his death was placed with adoptive parents. “The county council, as part of the Cumbria Safeguarding Children Partnership, has recommended that a full independent safeguarding review is carried out. A police investigation is also ongoing, and so we are unable to make any further comment at this stage.” The Adoption and Children Act 2002 says a child must live with adoptive parents for a period before an application for an adoption order can be made. When a child is placed with adopters they assume legal parental responsibility, but the child remains “looked after” by the local authority until an order is granted.