It’s been increasingly frustrating to witness the government’s reluctance to learn from its mistakes during the pandemic. One of the starkest and most easily rectified mistakes is the decision to outsource much of Britain’s Covid response. From PPE to testing kits, the government has outsourced billions of pounds’ worth of contracts to firms connected to the Tory party, many of which lacked relevant experience. Although it reached new heights during the pandemic, this wasn’t the first time the government’s outsourcing obsession had harmful effects. The list of scandals is long: who remembers when the army had to swoop in to provide security at the 2012 Olympics that G4S failed to deliver? Or the collapse of Carillion, when workers’ pensions went down the drain while executives still received their bonuses? With so many wasteful contracts handed out to Tory friends and donors during the Covid-19 crisis, the government’s approach to outsourcing has underlined the “one rule for them, another for us” mantra that surrounds Boris Johnson’s cabinet. But it has also shone a disturbing light on just how deeply the Tories have hollowed out our public services. When we gathered on our doorsteps to applaud our key workers, we weren’t clapping for Serco or Deloitte, and children weren’t banging pots and pans for management consultants. Yet instead of giving key workers in our public services a pay rise, this government contracted management consultants at Deloitte who were paid up to £1,000 a day to work on test and trace, a system that still isn’t up to scratch. It’s not just the public who should be frustrated. Qualified and experienced British businesses have been passed over by a government “chumocracy” that awarded contracts to firms with political connections (one company, run by a former neighbour of Matt Hancock, received a contract to provide Covid test kits after its owner exchanged WhatsApp messages with the health secretary). There are actions that can be taken right away to fix this mess. It’s time for the government to halt the emergency procurement measures that it put in place at the beginning of the pandemic, and reintroduce proper competitive tendering. During a crisis like this one, ministers must act at speed – but competitive tendering doesn’t have to be slow. It can be quick and agile, without lowering the standard of services provided or creating “VIP” lanes for companies awarded contracts that are concealed from the public. The government should also commit to publishing all outstanding Covid contracts by the end of February. It shouldn’t be the responsibility of investigative journalists and organisations such as the Good Law Project to find out the details of Covid contracts and understand where taxpayers’ money is going. Details of these contracts should be publicly available so they can be properly scrutinised. The current 40-day deadline for publishing the details of contracts should be returned to 30 days, and the Cabinet Office’s current Contracts Finder tool, which allows people to search for information about contracts worth more than £10,000, should be developed in the interests of transparency and public scrutiny. The government can also now look at clawing back some of the taxpayer money flushed away on contracts given to huge companies that fail to deliver. These are some of the first steps the government could take, if it had the will to do so. But there is a longer-term problem here. Ten years of austerity and outsourcing has scarred our communities and public services. This is why I am today setting out how a Labour government would put valuing our public services at the heart of our contracting and procurement process. To start with, a Labour government would oversee the biggest wave of insourcing in a generation. This approach would help support and develop our public services. Of course, there will always be a need for external insight and expertise, but private contractors need to be harnessed for the public good. Our local public services, from Bath to Bolton, Darlington to Dagenham, should be run for local communities – the people who use them. Transparency will also be key. Even before the pandemic, the government spent an extraordinary £292bn on outsourcing in 2018-19. This amounted to more than a third of all public spending in a single year, and that level is rising year on year. It’s only fair that the taxpayers who are paying for these contracts can scrutinise them. But the companies that run so many public services too often hide behind the smokescreen of “commercial sensitivity”. That’s why Labour will expand the Freedom of Information Act to apply to private companies when delivering new public service contracts. This should be just the start. Over the past decade, we’ve watched the weakening of far too many transparency mechanisms and anti-corruption measures. The government’s anti-corruption champion has gone from being a ministerial position to a backbench one with no teeth whatsoever. So Labour will introduce an independent commissioner on anti-corruption, and (as Joe Biden is similarly doing) an integrity and ethics commission to prevent corruption and cronyism, and once again aim to be a world leader on transparency and open governance. By cutting the cronyism and waste that comes with outsourcing, we can rebuild the foundations of our public services and strengthen the resilience of our communities and our country. Labour believes that our public services can play a crucial role in tackling the shared social missions of our time. That is the new leadership that our country needs. Rachel Reeves is shadow chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster and shadow minister for the Cabinet Office