Santiago Carreras scored two superb first-half tries but it was not enough to earn bottom club Gloucester victory over injury-ravaged Premiership leaders Bristol, who snatched an 18-17 win at Kingsholm. Ioan Lloyd’s penalty five minutes from time ensured Bristol remain top, with Gloucester’s losing bonus point insufficient to lift them off the foot of the table. Ollie Thorley scored Gloucester’s third try, while Billy Twelvetrees kicked a conversion. Bristol’s tries came from Bryan Byrne and Jake Heenan, with Lloyd adding two penalties and a conversion. “We’ve never talked about relegation, it’s just about building every week and getting young Gloucester players involved,” said Gloucester’s head coach, George Skivington, in stressing relegation had never been a consideration for him and his team, even before it was taken off the table. “The pain of a late loss in a derby is difficult to take but we are heading along the road nicely.” Bristol began brightly and took a fifth-minute lead when Byrne finished off a driving lineout for his fourth try in the last three matches. However, three minutes later Byrne was forced to withdraw with a leg injury and he was replaced by Will Capon. Worse was to follow for Bristol when former Gloucester wing Henry Purdy limped off, with Alapati Leiua coming onto the field. The visitors then suffered a further setback when Carreras intercepted a pass from Piers O’Conor to run 85 metres and score under the posts. Twelvetrees converted before both sides had injury problems, with Gloucester losing lock Matias Alemanno and Bristol their loose-head prop Nahuel Chaparro. After 26 minutes, Carreras scored his second try when he intercepted a wayward pass from Siale Piutau and the wing had enough pace to hold off the cover defence on a 50-metre run to the line. Bristol had endured a rough half-hour but they responded in style when Dave Attwood made a strong burst to send Heenan over, with Lloyd’s conversion bringing the sides level at 12-12 at half-time. Gloucester changed their whole front row at the interval and the hosts began to gain the ascendancy at the set-piece as the Bears conceded a couple of scrum penalties. From one of these close to the visitors’ line, Willi Heinz took a quick tap before a well-judged pass from Mark Atkinson sent Thorley over in the corner. Twelvetrees missed the conversion before Lloyd kicked a penalty to leave Bristol trailing by two points at the end of the third quarter. Bristol’s injury nightmare did not relent as No 8 Nathan Hughes became their fourth departure of the night when he hobbled off, but Lloyd held his nerve to fire over a 45-metre penalty to secure the West Country derby win. “We caused a lot of hassle for ourselves but we found a way to win,” said Bristol’s director of rugby, Pat Lam. “We needed to stay in our structures and stay patient but we gave away two interception tries and nearly a third, so there were a lot of apologies in the dressing room. “Obviously all the injuries were a concern as they are for all coaches. Nathan Hughes had a dead leg, but we will have to assess most of the others and will know more on Monday.” Bath also eased the pressure on director of rugby, Stuart Hooper, on Friday night as they ended a run of six successive defeats with a 27-22 win over Sale at the AJ Bell Stadium.