The Guardian’s Modern Masculinity project has been a great success since its launch in 2019, garnering huge numbers of views and large amounts of engagement, and being nominated for a Royal Television Society award. Here, we speak to its creator and presenter, Iman Amrani, about how it came about, and what it reveals about how men think about a wide range of topics ranging from male circumcision to fatherhood, role models and wellbeing. Prior to 2019, I had done a lot of journalism in male-dominated spaces and this laid the groundwork for the series. I had reported on the Bataclan attacks in Paris and other terrorist incidents across Europe, and had interviewed men about the effect of these events on their communities. I spoke to a lot of disillusioned young men. In 2017-18 I was covering knife crime in London, features on social issues in the UK, culture pieces on drill music and football – I was really just following my own interests. And then the #MeToo movement arrived and more questions were raised around masculinity. The Guardian is great at covering women’s issues, but the more I spoke to men and became aware of the issues being faced by young men in different contexts and different walks of life, the more urgent certain issues felt, and the more it felt like we needed to build bridges. All this conspired to make me keen to have an open, non-judgmental conversation about masculinity, and open a dialogue that could help us understand how we got to where we are, and how we can do better. I’m quite personally invested in the series – it comes naturally because I’m incredibly curious about the subject matter and keen to learn more. For example, I have more of an idea of what motherhood is about as women have spoken freely about that experience around me for as long as I can remember but I have less reference points for how fathers feel. I don’t think we hear or see that as often. So I was keen to do an episode on fatherhood and how dads have coped in lockdown. As journalists, I think it’s vital we exit our comfort zones, look beyond ourselves and people like us, speak to people whose paths we might not normally cross, and be open to having conversations and hearing responses that we might not usually encounter. There is so much negativity out there, so I just wanted to help create something positive and authentic. I’m very aware of the issues that feed into wider conversations about class and race, and I’ve felt comfortable. I remember speaking to Jon Snow – he’s an older gentleman, he’s in the media, a little bit of an establishment figure … and he opened up about his experience at boarding school, and the abuse that went on. It made me realise that even the so-called “privileged” among us have a story, something they have had to struggle with. I also spoke to an ex-army guy in Liverpool, who has chronic PTSD. He explained how the gyms being closed during the lockdown had affected his mental health. He said he feels he’s a much better man when he has had the release that exercise offers. I was suddenly able to better understand why issues like stress arise among men, and why in some men, in some circumstances, that stress or frustration could manifest as anger, or even violence. I feel that lots of people still, today, don’t really have the tools to break down their mental health issues. I find that when people are shown other individuals who are struggling, it makes starting those initial conversations much easier. It creates a safe space and an environment where men can let their guard down. We don’t always make enough time to connect with people, and now we do have the time, but not really the freedom – so it’s up to all of us to do what we can to reach out and check on people. I get messages from viewers almost daily and I feel very privileged that people have felt that level of engagement and trust with what we’ve done. Sometimes they share their personal stories with me and I just wish I had more time to properly respond. There’s something about video as a medium that means people feel really close to the subject, and close to me too in some ways. It’s much better than words on a page when it comes to conveying nuance, too. Which is great, because these are real, rounded human beings and it’s important to communicate that. A bit of a community has evolved around the series, and it’s taken on something of a life of its own, which is really special. We also have a bit more time and space to delve into whichever topics we’re focusing on. There’s so much I could say here, but I do think the first step is just to initiate honest conversations, and to create fun, positive spaces where support is provided and conversations can start. I really respect the work of organisations like Football Beyond Borders – they start with fun football lessons and then use this as a springboard to help young men better understand themselves, develop friendships, leadership skills etc. I just wanted to reach out my hand to men and say 'we’re here and we want to listen' Things don’t have to be so directly, obviously about the specific issues themselves – sometimes mental health conversations can feel a bit daunting to start, so it can be good to start small. The last episode of series two went out in March 2020, when the world was changing. So I had done two series in the pre-pandemic world and continuing the coverage during lockdown felt like the right way to go. Mental health felt like an urgent topic from the start. We know now that men are more prone to certain types of mental health issues, and in these incredibly challenging times, I really just wanted to reach out my hand to men and say “we’re here and we want to listen to whatever you’ve got to say”. The logistics of filming in lockdown have made it difficult to produce a lot of coverage, but we’ve got two forthcoming episodes. One looks at dads in lockdown – it’s not about men and women competing, it’s about symbioticism at home. There are so many modern dads who want to be good, emotionally available fathers and husbands, but then other aspects of their lives can suffer as a result. We’ve also got an episode exploring the experiences of men in the mental health system – especially those with more serious issues like schizophrenia, psychosis and bipolar disorder. There are so many more issues facing masculinity that I’d love to explore, and hopefully when lockdown starts to lift I’ll be able to go out and have more conversations. I never fail to find them inspiring.