Kate Lucey Thu 18 Feb 2021 11.33 GMT


Last modified on Thu 18 Feb 2021 11.35 GMT By now, we’re all aware that the effects of the pandemic and the resulting lockdowns can take a toll on our mental health and emotional wellbeing. Social isolation alongside anxiety about the health of those we love can make us feel lonely, angry and generally despairing about the situation we – and the world – find ourselves in. All of us will have different reactions to the changes in our circumstances, but acknowledging that you’re not feeling your best is the first step to take as you figure out what you can do to help manage your mental wellbeing. It’s important not to let your anxiety consume you. The following 10 tips are suggestions for improving your mental wellbeing based on clinically approved advice set out on the NHS Every Mind Matters portal, and backed up by qualified psychologists and therapists from the Counselling Directory database. 1 Continue to plan practical thingsStaying inside is vital right now, and the logistics of receiving your essentials have changed. If you’re unable to get to the shops, seek out a delivery service or ask neighbours and friends if they could help you. The same goes for obtaining medication and any continuing treatment for mental or physical issues you have. By prioritising your own needs, you will have “the confidence to be able to be there for others too, without sacrificing your own happiness,” says counsellor Philip Karahassan. “It can feel overwhelming not knowing what to do and when to do it, which means your first instinct can be to quit and not do it at all. Reassess your needs so that you feel in control of what you need to feel safe and well.” If you’re struggling, reach out to a friend or neighbour for practical help or support, and be sure to contact your GP to see what services they can offer you. 2 Stay connected with othersExpressions of friendship are believed to help us feel more soothed and positive thanks to the release of the hormone oxytocin, which studies have linked to social bonding. Staying connected to people doesn’t just give you something to occupy your time during the long evenings, but can make a positive impact on your wellbeing. If even the thought of setting up yet another video call is exhausting, remember that exchanging text messages or voice notes with people who are close to you can make a big difference. “We’re a social species and thrive when we feel connected to others,” says counsellor Anthony Purnell. “Connection is the nourishment human beings need to feel safe, secure and loved.” 3 Talk about your worriesIf you are feeling helpless and anxious right now, remember that many others feel the same way. The pandemic has changed life for all of us, and talking about any concerns can help you feel more relaxed – it may also help a friend to realise that they’re not alone in their mental struggles. There’s no need for anyone to think it’s a sign of weakness to admit that they’re not feeling as capable as usual. Asking a friend what they do when their pandemic anxiety becomes too much can start a really honest and comforting conversation. Purnell says the concept of the “stiff upper lip” is an enduring one in the UK. “This mentality leads people to feel that we shouldn’t bother others with our problems. I’d suggest considering who’s likely to validate how you feel, and that you make it clear whether you’d like the person to help solve a problem or simply listen.” If you can’t talk to anyone you know, there are helplines you can contact for support. 4 Look after your bodyThis one can be particularly difficult during times of stress or sadness, when it’s easy to reach for a comforting snack or drink. Alcohol can make some people feel good in the short term and seem like a quick fix to an emotional problem, but it can cause your mood to dip. Exactly when the low mood strikes will vary in different people – it could be shortly after the drink’s “warming” effects, or at some point during the next day – but alcohol will not have a long-term cheering effect. During the colder months it’s less appealing to head outside for exercise, but the mental benefits do make it worthwhile – so don’t forget that you can always exercise indoors, or if you’re heading out do remember to maintain social distancing. Also, it’s worth remembering that keeping healthy helps reduce your risk of suffering Covid-19 complications. “In the current climate, it’s more important than ever to look after your body. An unhealthy body is more at risk of lowered or impaired immunity,” says counsellor Carol-Anne Cowie. 5 Stay on top of your difficult feelingsAnxiety over the pandemic is natural, but if your worries are having an impact on your daily life and you feel unable to manage them, advice is available on NHS Every Mind Matters. Be honest with yourself about how you’re feeling, and try to note down (physically note down, even if it feels strange) what makes you feel particularly worse or better. Just acknowledging your triggers and comforters can help you begin to start to manage your mental wellbeing. Counsellor Siobhan Long agrees: “It’s important to remember that we do have control over our behaviour. We need to start acknowledging our thoughts and feelings, and how they impact us.” 6 Try not to overwhelm yourself, and only use trusted news sourcesSocial media and 24/7 news coverage can result in a bombardment of information that does nothing to lessen anxiety. The spread of misinformation online is rife, so ensure that you’re getting your updates from trusted sources such as gov.uk or the NHS website. If information is forwarded to you that is not from a reputable source, fact check it before believing it, and perhaps give yourself allotted times to check the news each day. 7 Check your employment and benefits rights If your professional circumstances have changed during the pandemic, then it is understandable that you may be worrying about employment, income and potentially a range of other financial or lifestyle issues. Every Mind Matters has a lot of practical advice around ensuring you know your employment rights, and that you’re aware of any benefits you may be entitled to, as well as tips to help you adapt to working from home. 8 Carry on doing things that you enjoyThe new lockdown rules may have made it difficult for you to enjoy some hobbies that you took part in previously, but making the effort to try something new can be hugely beneficial to your mental wellbeing, so don’t be deterred from giving something different a go. Painting, reading, or even setting a TV or film challenge with a friend (such as watching five films on a certain theme, or by a certain director, or featuring a certain actor) can introduce you to new ways of having fun that you’ve never experienced before. There’s no harm in giving it a go. “In times of uncertainty and turmoil, little things count more than ever, they give us a purpose, respite, and a sense of familiarity,” says counsellor Kenan Smith. Having activities, hobbies or interests, helps us to blossom our creativity and imagination. It can help us to stay on track, keep us grounded and keep us hopeful.” 9 Take time to relax“During this stressful period, it’s important to incorporate time in each day to do some form of relaxation,” says Smith. “This could be anything from baking, having a bath or exercising. This can help to lower our levels of general anxiety because by doing positive things for ourselves this sends signals to the mind to calm the anxious part of our brains. “By doing this consistently the mind becomes calmer because the focus is on relaxation and not the stressful issues.” Check out Every Mind Matters for helpful relaxation tips. 10 Get good-quality sleep“Sleep is important for not only physical health but emotional regulation also,” says Karahassan, who adds that not getting enough sleep can lead to feelings of emotional vulnerability, anxiety and tension, as well as difficulties with concentration. There are different sleep techniques that can work for our individual problems, as well as a growing number of apps that could be worth giving a try. For tips and advice to get good sleep, search Every Mind Matters. If you need help for a mental health crisis, emergency or breakdown, NHS urgent mental health helplines offer 24-hour advice and support for people of all ages. Find a local helpline here: nhs.uk/urgentmentalhealth This advertiser content was paid for by the UK government. All together (Remote education) is a government-backed initiative tasked with informing the UK about the Covid-19 pandemic. For more information, visit gov.uk/coronavirus