The art historian Janina Ramirez returns for a second series of her entertaining rummage through architectural relics. In this opener, Ramirez is in Crete, piecing together the history of Arthur Evans, who unearthed the palace of Knossos – the home of the mythical Minotaur – and whose childhood obsessions with ancient Greece led to his discovery of one of the first western civilisations. Yet, his legacy is now mired in controversy, owing to his embellishments of his discoveries. Ammar Kalia Let the Springwatch presenter bring your blood pressure down as she explores the nation’s stunning coastal trails. First on the list: an 11-mile walk on the South West Coast Path in Exmoor, featuring staggering rock formations, an iron-age fort and a church with room for 30. And: exhale. Hannah J Davies Russell T Davies’s hit drama about the Aids crisis in Britain in the 80s and early 90s reaches its devastating conclusion. Ritchie’s mum, Valerie (the excellent Keeley Hawes), is on the warpath to London, while Jill and Roscoe try to keep the gang together for a painful reunion on the Isle of Wight. AK “When in Rome!” Wallace trundles his childlike enthusiasm into the Italian capital, pointing excitedly at the Colosseum and the Pantheon before enjoying the flavours of deep-fried artichoke and a massive cream cake for breakfast. Then he learns how to shop at markets like a local. Jack Seale Following his Hootenanny, Jools is back in his south London home studio for a new series of musical treats, each week inviting a guest to talk through their musical influences via a selection of archive Later performances. This week, Jools is joined by the singer Arlo Parks. AK The thoughtful and admirably human comedy-drama exploring the Muslim-American experience through the eyes of Ramy Youssef continues. Tonight, Ramy meets a Jewish woman – but what looks like a hook-up soon turns into an exploration of his conflicted attitudes to sex and drugs. Phil Harrison Stan & Ollie (Jon S Baird, 2018), 8.25pm, BBC OneSteve Coogan plays Stan Laurel and John C Reilly is Oliver Hardy in this superbly acted biopic about the film comedians’ twilight years. Digging into the psychology of the double act, Jon S Baird’s film follows their reunion in 1953 for a UK music hall tour after years of estrangement and falling popularity. Simon Wardell Australian Open tennis 8.25am, Eurosport 1. The second men’s singles semi. Premiership rugby union: Bath v Gloucester 7pm, BT Sport 2. From the Recreation Ground. Premier League football: Wolverhampton Wanderers v Leeds United 7.30pm, BT Sport 1. Bielsa’s entertainers travel to Molineux.