Beatrice Aidin Analyse your skin Start by doing a quick home test: wash your face, and if your skin produces oil 20 minutes afterwards, it’s likely you have oily skin. Online analyses can also be a good way to understand what your skin needs to feel its best, so try the diagnostic tool at SkinCeuticals – especially helpful given that a face-to-face consultation with a dermatologist isn’t an option for the time being. Use the correct cleanser morning and nightThere is a fine balance between cleansing the skin and stripping it with aggressive ingredients, especially with an oily complexion. Look for a cleanser that contains salicylic acid to actively penetrate through the skin’s oil surface and unclog pores with glycolic acid, an ingredient that gently exfoliates the skin’s top layer. In a light gel formulation, SkinCeuticals Blemish and Age Defense removes makeup, environmental pollution and sebum while exfoliating to brighten the skin and smooth dermal irregularities. A good tip is to cleanse and apply skincare when the working day finishes in order to get the maximum benefits, rather than waiting until bedtime – when it could be tempting to skip that skincare step. Embrace toner “I hardly ever recommend using a toner, however, for those with oily skin I do, immediately after cleansing,” says dermatologist Dr Emma Craythorne, an advocate of SkinCeuticals. Why? Toner can remove the last traces of makeup, pollution and stubborn dirt and prepare your skin to best absorb serum. Grainy skin scrubs are to be avoided as oily skin is often delicate. If exfoliation is a must for you, go for a product that contains salicylic acid to clean blocked pores. Choose the correct serum Designed specifically for oily, blemish-prone skin, the new SkinCeuticals Silymarin CF serum “is excellent for oil control and protection from free radicals found in pollution and created by UV rays”. Stay hydratedDrinking lots of water to keep skin hydrated is the mantra we all know but often fail to do. So make what feels like a chore interesting by adding herbs, lemon or cucumber to chilled water kept in the fridge, or invest in a sparkling water dispenser. Too much coffee and tea is dehydrating – so is alcohol – but herbal teas will keep the body hydrated. Food is another source of hydration, and snacks that are full of water include antioxidant-rich berries, plums, celery, cucumbers and bell peppers. Never squeeze spotsHowever clean your hands, squeezing spots leaves already congested pores open to bacteria. Yes, it may be satisfying, but popping spots can lead to bruising and scarring. Keep stress at bayStress leads to inflammation in the body and this affects skin quality. Walking is a simple and free form of exercise and is shown to reduce stress; during a fast stroll, concentrate on breathing, which helps to carry oxygen and nutrients to working cells throughout the body – including its biggest organ, the skin, and help remove waste products including free radicals. Eat healthy oils Once upon a time, we believed if you had oily skin you had to cut down on oily food. Now we know that some oil-rich foods can reduce inflammation. Eat oily fish such as sardines, mackerel and trout once a week as these are high in omega-3 fatty acids. Vegan? Flaxseed is your best source of omega-3. For soothing vitamin E, add almonds, avocado and pine nuts to your diet. Wear SPF every day The higher the protection, the better. Yes, even in winter. If you’ve been skipping SPF because sunscreen is too greasy, take heart. “The latest formulations include ultralight fluids that are absorbed by the skin instantly, and they leave a matte finish that absorbs excess oils so are ideal for oily skin,” says Craythorne. Stick to a routineIt takes 30 days for the top layer of the skin, the epidermis, to turn over once, but dermatologists recommend giving a new product 12 weeks to deliver results. And stick to the basics: cleanser, toner, serum, and SPF is a simple routine that will soon become second nature. Discover the skincare for you with SkinCeuticals’ antioxidant finder